A global celebration of horticulture

NOT far from the foot of the magni­ficent Great Wall on the outskirts of Beijing, lies a new park with more than 100 botanical pavilions.

Stretching across 503ha, this is the venue for the International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 (Beijing Expo 2019) – the latest attraction in the Chinese capital.

Publicity chief of the exhibition, Chui Yong, said the exhibition is a display of power, beauty and wisdom of plants while creating awareness among the people on the importance of greening.

“When this place opens to the public on April 29, there will be some 50,000 species of trees and plants here,” he said as he took a group of Asian journalists for a tour around the park recently.

Apart from more than 40 species of famous Chinese flowers, such as peony, lotus, orchid, Chinese rose and camellia, the exhibition also displays a variety of unique flowering plants, including more than 40 new species from around the world.

Visitors also get a chance to view more than 100 rare and endangered species of plants.

Some 16 million visitors are expected at the expo, themed “Building a Beautiful Home Featuring Harmonious Existence between Man and Nature”.

Chui emphasised that green technologies and ecology techniques were widely used in the construction and design of the park.

“We hope to create an environment where man and nature co-exist in harmony as well as to promote the development of ecological civilisation.

“The main pavilions are installed with photovoltaic glass panels and rainwater collection system,” said Chui, adding that the water, which is stored underground, would be used for irrigation.

Located in Yanqing district, the Beijing Expo 2019 site is about 10km from the Badaling section of the Great Wall and 15km from the venue of the 2022 Winter Olympics.

One of the highlights would be China’s Ruyi Pavilion, where the Chinese would showcase their horticulture history, latest products and research achievements in the industry, said the bureau’s deputy director-general Ye Dahua.

“The design of the curved exhibition hall is inspired by the splendour of ruyi. This is a way the Chinese show our hospitality, wishing the visitors forever happiness and good fortune,” he said.

Ruyi is a type of sceptre used by the royal family in the ancient days as decoration or in ceremonies.

The international exhibition hall is another building worth visiting.

Its roof is built by connecting 94 pieces of materials in the shape of an umbrella and flower petal, hence it is known as “The Ocean of Umbrellas and Flowers”.

Not far away is the colourful multi-purpose Guirui theatre, built in the shape of a gigantic butterfly. It is named after the nearby Guirui River where a village of the same name was located thousands of years ago.

The Chinese character gui resembles a woman walking an elephant while the ancient word rui indicates where two rivers meet, explained Chui.

Legend has it that some wild elephants had entered the village, destroying the people’s homes and crops but they were eventually tamed by a brave woman. That was how the word gui was created.

Strolling down the beautiful gardens and marvellous landscape, the eye-catching Yongning Ge – an ancient Chinese architectural tower – stood as a welcoming landmark for visitors.

This is the highest point of the park that enables tourists to oversee the whole expo site.

The name Yongning means peaceful and stable, indicating that the people are enjoying a good life, Chui said.

Apart from these, the park also houses a horticultural ancient town, built according to the ancient Anhui town, a botanical garden with a huge greenhouse filled with 101 types of plant species and the international garden where dozens of countries showcase their distinctive cultures with plants and flowers.

So far, 110 countries and international organisations have confirmed their participation at Beijing Expo 2019, the highest attendance in the expo’s history.

Most of the participating nations are from Asia including Myanmar, Nepal, South Korea, North Korea, Vietnam, Thailand, Pakistan and India.

Other countries that have hosted the event are Holland, UK, Germany, France, Canada, Japan, Italy, Austria, Thailand, Belgium, Taiwan and Turkey.

Beijing Expo 2019 will end on Oct 7. The tickets are priced between 80 yuan (RM50) and 160 yuan (RM100) each.



Beijing reports more days with good air quality
BEIJING, May 9 (Xinhua) -- Beijing environmental authorities announced on Thursday that good air quality days for the capital from January to April increased to 84 days, and heavy pollution days were reduced to three.

Yao Hui, deputy director of the municipal ecology and environment bureau said the average concentration of PM2.5, airborne particles smaller than 2.5 micrometers in diameter that pose serious health risks, was 51 micrograms per cubic meter during the period.

The average concentration of PM2.5 in Beijing was 51 micrograms per cubic meter last year, down 12.1 percent year on year, according to the annual environment report published on Thursday.

Beijing started to implement a three-year action plan to win the war against air pollution. It has taken actions to curb pollutants from diesel trucks, dust and volatile organic compounds.

Nearly 5,000 cases related to environmental pollution were investigated last year, with a total of 230 million yuan (33.7 million U.S. dollars) fined for violations of environmental laws.

Environmental departments checked more than 216 million heavy-duty diesel vehicles and punished over 325,000 vehicles that exceeded the emission standards in 2018.


Asian culture and tourism expo to open in Beijing
An exhibition that showcases culture and tourism of Asian countries will be held in Beijing from May 16-18, as part of the upcoming Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations (CDAC). 

The Asian Culture and Tourism Exhibition, hosted by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism, aims to enable visitors to better understand Asian civilizations.
Participants include government officials, travel agencies, hotels, resorts and airlines from Chinese provinces as well as more than 30 Asian countries and regions, including Japan, South Korea, India, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Art performances, VR and games will be available for visitors to better savor what Asia has to offer.



China takes actions to ensure safe holiday travel
BEIJING, May 1 (Xinhua) -- China has acted to ensure travelers a safe trip during the May Day holiday starting Wednesday.

The Ministry of Public Security has warned the public of the risks including peak flows on expressways and around tourist sites, heavy rainfall, and more traffic violations.

Police have been drafted to secure major transportation hubs such as key railway stations and trains.

Tighter security checks are required with more personnel and facilities involved and patrol has become more frequent, especially in densely populated areas, railway police authorities say.

Plainclothes police have been sent to major train stations and on board to crack down law violations, including theft and fraud. Random inspections of suspicious luggage or items will also be made on trains bound for cities including Beijing and Shanghai.

More police will be arranged to watch and prevent potential safety hazards from natural conditions, such as heavy rainfall and geological disasters, according to railway police authorities.

Ctrip, China's largest online travel agency, estimated that about 160 million trips will be made during this year's four-day May Day holiday.

Beijing Is One Major Step Closer to Opening the Biggest Airport in the World
Beijing Daxing International Airport — which is set to become the world’s biggest airport when it opens later this year — announced that it will begin test flights next week.

These test flights won’t be like normally scheduled commercial flights. Aircraft from Air China, China Eastern Airlines, China Southern Airlines, and Xiamen Airlines will land at the airport on the morning of May 13. After receiving ground clearance, they will take off again. The whole process is expected to take less than one hour.

According to the newspaper Beijing Youth Daily, the airport’s four runways and taxis passed inspection last week. The newspaper says work is progressing on schedule for the airport’s opening later this year.

Both China Southern Airlines and China Eastern Airlines will use the airport as their new base when it opens.
The terminal, designed by Zaha Hadid, will be 700,000 square meters, and include separate passenger areas for domestic and international travel. It is expected to become the world’s largest airport in terms of surface area.

All work on the airport is expected to be completed by June 30. The airport is expected to open to the public on Sept. 30. By 2021, 45 million passengers are expected to pass through the airport annually. By 2025, that number is expected to grow to 72 million.

China has one of the fastest-growing travel markets in the world. Of the 20 fastest-growing airports in the world, 11 are located in China alone.