South plays down North’s missile drills

Seoul offered Friday a conspicuously conservative assessment of North Korea’s latest military provocation while Pyongyang released flamboyant reports of the missile test supervised by its leader Kim Jong-un.

The North’s state media, including the Korean Central News Agency (KCNA), released Friday 10 photos of Thursday afternoon’s missile launches. According to the KCNA report, Kim directed the launches. It said various “long-range strike means” were tested.

“The successful drill of deployment and strike designed to inspect the ability of rapid reaction of the defense units in the forefront area and on the western front fully showed the might of the units,” KCNA said.

While South Korea maintained Friday that the North launched two short-range missiles Thursday, the United States went further in its assessment by saying that ballistic missiles were fired. “North Korea flight-tested multiple ballistic missiles from a location in northwestern North Korea,” Pentagon spokesman Lt. Col. David Eastburn said in a statement on Thursday, Washington time.

Seoul actually refrained from using the term missiles for the North’s earlier tests, which took place Saturday. After Thursday’s launches, it admitted that the North fired missiles, rather than using the term “unidentified projectiles.”

But the Blue House remained reluctant to agree with the U.S. assessment that the North fired ballistic missiles.

“We didn’t notice a U.S. announcement [about the ballistic missiles],” a senior presidential official said Friday. “As far as we understand, the U.S. government has not made public its official conclusion.”

A missile is a guided, self-propelled weapons system, and they come in two forms - cruise and ballistic missiles.

A cruise missile flies with constant speed to deliver a warhead at a target over a long distance with high accuracy. Cruise missiles are capable of traveling at supersonic or high subsonic speeds and flying on a non-ballistic, extremely low-altitude trajectory.

A ballistic missile is launched on a ballistic trajectory to deliver one or more warheads. It follows the path of a ball thrown upwards, which depends on gravity to strike the target. While shorter-range ballistic missiles stay within the earth’s atmosphere, longer-ranged ones, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles, travel well outside the atmosphere.

Ballistic missiles are considered harder to intercept. The North conducted its last intercontinental ballistic missile test in 2017 and claimed that its range was capable of reaching the U.S. mainland.

Under UN Security Council resolutions, North Korea is banned from firing a ballistic missile. Cruise missile tests, however, are not prohibited.

Rep. Ahn Gyu-baek of the ruling Democratic Party, chairman of the National Defense Committee of the National Assembly, said Friday that further analysis is necessary to identify what the North fired.

He also questioned the U.S. assessment. “They seem like [ballistic missiles] because of the shapes and the transporter erector launcher [used for the test], but they flew at a depressed trajectory,” Ahn said. “It is also hard for the United States to make the distinction from far away, and the observation made in Korea may carry some differences.”

The South Korean military also refused to say that the North fired ballistic missiles. “All we can say right now is that they were short-range missiles,” a military official said Friday.

“It is nothing more than just a playing with words to say they were short-range missiles rather than ballistic missiles,” said Gwon Myeong-guk, former commander of the Air Defense Artillery Command. “The government is repeatedly downplaying the North’s provocations.”

Experts said the government, military and ruling party are intentionally downplaying the level of provocations to avoid damage to its diplomatic campaign with Pyongyang.

“The Moon administration just managed to gain a concession from the United States to send food aid to the North,” said Shin Beom-chul, head of the Center for Security and Unification at the Asan Institute for Policy Studies. “Seoul is worrying that opinions at home and abroad will turn against the plan if it turned out that the North had violated UN resolutions.”

Seoul said two short-range missiles were fired Thursday, but the photos released by KCNA showed that the North Korean military fired missiles - whether ballistic or not - and other types of artillery. The North fired 240-millimeter (9.4-inch) multiple rocket launchers and a new type of self-propelled artillery, the photos showed.

The North’s photos show at least six projectiles, including two missiles, were fired.

The photos of Thursday’s exercise also showed that the missiles in question were identical in shape to the “projectiles” the North fired on Saturday. The North used different launch vehicles for the two tests, but the shape and size of the missiles were identical in the photos.

“It seems that the government is trying to be considerate toward the North with conservative assessments,” Shin said. “But the North is publicly releasing photos of their exercises and embarrassing the South.”



Lotte Chem finishes U.S. cracker project
Lotte Chemical completed the construction of a $3.1 billion complex in the American state of Louisiana that will make the company the seventh largest ethylene manufacturer in the world.

For Lotte Group, the country’s fifth largest conglomerate, the complex is a pivotal part of Chairman Shin Dong-bin’s grand plan to develop the chemical business as one of the group’s two main pillars along with retail and food, Lotte’s main business for decades.

“I thank Lotte Chemical staff, partners and the two governments that made this project possible,” Chairman Shin said during a celebratory event held in Lake Charles, Louisiana on Thursday. “We promise to fulfill our role to lead Korea’s chemical industry with pride as the first local company to establish a world-class petrochemical plant in the United States.”

In a congratulatory message delivered by a White House official, U.S. President Donald Trump lauded the $3.1 billion complex as the single largest investment made by a Korean company in the United States during his administration and proof that the Korea-U.S. alliance remains strong.

The event was attended by Prime Minister Lee Nak-yon, Lotte’s Chairman Shin and U.S. government officials.

According to Lotte, the U.S. plant will increase the company’s ethylene production capacity to 4.5 million tons a year, making it the seventh-largest ethylene producer in the world. As of last year, it was outside the 20th rank. Ethylene is a widely used chemical substance that can produce various types of plastic including polyethylene.

Measuring 1 million square meters (247 acres), the complex consists of an ethane cracker that can produce 1 million tons of ethylene from shale gas per year, and an ethylene glycol factory with a capacity of 700,000 tons a year. Ethylene glycol is used for synthetic fibers and plastic bottles.

The ethane cracker is partly owned by Texas-based Westlake Chemical, which has a 12 percent share. The rest of the cracker and the ethylene glycol plant belong to Lotte.

“The annual capacity of the ethane cracker at the moment is 1 million tons a year, but the site was made to increase this capacity one day to a maximum of 1.4 million tons a year,” said Lotte Chemical President Kim Gyo-hyun to Korean reporters ahead of the celebratory event Thursday.

“Our goal is to boost our annual revenue to 50 trillion won [$42.4 billion] in the next 10 years,” he added. Lotte Chemical’s annual revenue last year was 16.5 trillion won.

The completion of the massive project is a significant event for the conglomerate. Lotte has gone through a difficult time following a high-profile succession battle pitting Chairman Shin against his older brother in 2015 and Shin Dong-bin’s 10-month jailing for bribery last year.

He was heavily involved in many of Lotte’s investment plans and his absence hindered a lot of decision makings.

The chemical sector, in particular, is a business he is passionate about.




The rise of South Korea’s defense industry and its impact on South Korean foreign relations
South Korean foreign policy has understandably been focused on deterring acts of aggression by North Korea for the last 66 years. After all, the two Korean neighbors are technically still at war, though an armistice halted the major fighting between them in 1953. But if South Korea’s decade-long ambition to turn its defense industry into an export powerhouse is fully realized, a new set of foreign policy challenges could be thrust upon Seoul as other countries, particularly China, may come to see South Korean arms exports as running counter to their national interests. Already, the South Korean defense industry’s latest sales of fighters and frigates have turned heads.
Right Reform at the Right Time

To be sure, the recent success of South Korea’s defense companies did not happen overnight. Their initial efforts to export high-tech defense products fared poorly. Most notably, Korea Aerospace Industries’ attempts to sell its T-50 jet trainers to Singapore and the United Arab Emirates failed in 2010. In the wake of such failures, Seoul implemented wide-ranging reforms to improve its defense industry’s competitiveness. It eased the defense offset requirements on foreign companies, promoted greater competition among South Korea’s chaebols, and nurtured small- and mid-sized defense companies that could efficiently produce the components for combat systems.[1] In the following years, South Korea’s reforms enabled not only its large defense integrators to lower their prices, but also its smaller companies to enter global defense supply chains.

Equally important to the success of the South Korean defense industry has been its technical ability to manufacture sophisticated military hardware. Remarkably, it has been able to do so in not just one, but across three domains: land, sea, and air. In the past, only big countries with deep pockets, like China, Russia, and the United States, had the resources to do that. Of course, South Korea’s ability did not sprout by chance. For years, South Korea has spent more on research and development as a percentage of its GDP than any other country in the world except Israel.

Still, South Korea’s defense industry owes some of its success to good timing. By the late 2010s, the world had become more unpredictable with the rise of China, resurgence of Russia, and retrenchment of the United States. As a result, countries from Southeast Asia to Eastern Europe have sought to strengthen and, in a few cases, entirely rebuild their military capabilities. Seoul’s timely reform of its defense industry positioned it well to capitalize on that new demand.

Hanwha Land Systems won notable contracts for its K9 155-mm self-propelled howitzers from Estonia, Finland, and Norway. Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering sold six Chang Bogo-class diesel-electric attack submarines to Indonesia. Hyundai Heavy Industries sold two Jose Rizal-class frigates to the Philippines. And Korea Aerospace Industries was eventually successful in selling not only its T-50 jet trainers to Indonesia, Iraq, and Thailand, but also its FA-50 fighters (the combat variant of the T-50) to the Philippines. Meanwhile, Oman and Poland have begun to evaluate Hyundai Rotem’s K2 tanks for their armies.

No doubt, the South Korean defense industry’s close collaboration with Western defense firms has helped immensely. For example, the K9 is based on the design of the American M109A2 155-mm self-propelled howitzer. The Chang Bogo class is based on the design of the German Type 209 diesel-electric attack submarine. And the FA-50 is based on the design of the American F-16 fighter. Nonetheless, South Korean defense products have come a long way. They are now both technologically and price competitive. As such, they hold great appeal to countries in need of advanced combat systems.
Drawing China’s Ire                                                 

Clearly, the concern that has driven several Asian countries to seek those combat systems is China. While most had once regarded China’s rise as benign, many have grown wary of the country as Chinese behavior has become more truculent. In 2010, China’s then foreign minister amplified this unease by declaring at a regional forum that “China is a big country and other countries are small countries and that is just a fact”—intimating that China would get its way regardless of the interests of other countries. But, in 2017, Seoul did not heed China’s objections to the American Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) anti-missile system and allowed the United States to deploy it in South Korea. China was none too pleased, as it believed that THAAD could be used to not only track and target North Korean ballistic missiles, but also its own. And so, China took a series of punitive actions against South Korea.

China’s state-owned media urged Chinese consumers to boycott South Korean products. Then, China’s national tourism administration launched an unofficial campaign to stop Chinese tour groups from traveling to South Korea, costing the country an estimated $7 billion. China also intensified its harassment of South Korean firms. In particular, Beijing targeted the South Korean conglomerate Lotte, which provided the land for the THAAD deployment, by “fining it for its advertising practices and shutting down a large number of its supermarkets in China for fire regulation violations.” Furthermore, China allowed its fishermen to more forcefully assert themselves in South Korean waters. In one incident, a group of 44 Chinese fishing boats surrounded a South Korean coast guard vessel, a tactic reminiscent of those used by Chinese fishing boats in the South China Sea.

In the future, should South Korean arms exports of submarines and combat aircraft to Southeast Asia gain momentum, they could make China’s pursuit of its “core interests” in the region more difficult. Arming themselves with advanced Western-compatible combat systems would enable Southeast Asian countries to not only improve their ability to deter China, but also give them the option to more closely cooperate with American and Japanese forces to constrain China. That has the potential to irritate China to an even greater extent than the THAAD deployment.
Broadening Security Horizons

If the ambitious plans of South Korea for its defense industry come to fruition, the country’s exports will top its record $3.5 billion. That would make South Korea a top-ten source of defense products in the world. In January 2019, Seoul updated its defense offset policy to support its export push. Rather than focus on technology transfers from foreign companies, the new policy seeks greater local production and export facilitation through international supply chains.[2]

Today, the South Korean defense industry is busily developing its next generation of combat systems, including the KF-X multirole fighter and the Sejong Daewang-class destroyer. Managed wisely, these new combat systems could propel the industry into greater growth. However, if exported in quantity to regions like Southeast Asia, they could also erode the military advantages some countries there currently hold. As to how those countries could react to the prospect of losing their military edge, South Korea need only to reflect on its recent experience with China. No doubt Seoul will have to either guard against or prepare for such repercussions in the future.

Over the longer term, the continued growth of South Korean defense exports could impact Seoul’s foreign relations in another way. Along with Japan’s stepped-up diplomacy, South Korea’s defense exports have begun to draw the countries of Northeast and Southeast Asia closer together. Whereas the countries of each region once almost exclusively looked to global powers to improve their security, they are now increasingly looking to each other. The new defense relationships that South Korea is forging with countries like Indonesia will create new interests and incentives. Those will invariably force South Korea to widen the aperture of its foreign policy lens and possibly enmesh it in international security issues well beyond the Korean Peninsula.


