Indonesia: Police hunt inmates after mass prison break in Sumatra
More than 100 prisoners escape after rioting and fire break out at detention centre in the island's Siak district.
Authorities have launched a massive manhunt on Indonesia's Sumatra island after more than 100 inmates escaped from prison.

The prison break came early in the morning on Saturday after rioting and a fire broke out at the detention centre in the island's Siak district.

Widodo Eko Prihastopo, the Riau province police chief, said 115 prisoners had been recaptured by late morning, but dozens of detainees from a prison population of nearly 650 remained at large.

"Police with assistance from the army and surrounding community are still searching for the rest," Prihastopo said.

The rioting came after guards beat several inmates who were caught using methamphetamine, police said.

Three detainees suffered stab wounds and a policeman was shot during the rioting, the local health office told AFP news agency.

Prison breaks are common in Indonesia, where inmates are often held in unsanitary conditions at overcrowded prisons.

In July 2013, about 240 prisoners escaped during a deadly riot at a prison in Medan, the capital of North Sumatra province.

In November last year, 113 prisoners fled from the Lambaro prison in Banda Aceh city. Earlier that year, more than 400 inmates broke out at an overcrowded prison in Riau province.

Indonesia election tainted, opposition marchers say, but government warns against treason
JAKARTA: Hundreds of supporters of an opposition presidential candidate marched in Indonesia on Friday (May 10) to protest against what they called election fraud, as the government warned that efforts to cast doubt on the outcome could amount to treason.

The protesters, spurred by unofficial results of last month's election showing that Prabowo Subianto lost to incumbent President Joko Widodo, called for fairness and vigilance in the vote counting process.
"We want this agency to do their job as fairly as possible," said Tita Hutagalung, a 50-year-old homemaker who joined the protest outside the election watchdog in central Jakarta.

Election agency officials did not offer any immediate comment.

The world's third-largest democracy held the biggest single-day election on Apr 17 to elect a president and national and regional level parliaments.

Widodo won 56 per cent of the popular vote versus 43 per cent for Prabowo, a sample of votes counted by private pollsters showed. The General Election Commission is to announce official results on May 22.

Although many independent observers and analysts have said the elections were free and fair, Prabowo has refused to concede defeat, with his campaign team making repeated accusations of irregularities.

At a briefing this week, the challenger once again said his own team's vote count put him in the lead, called for an independent audit of the result and said he was pessimistic the courts would give him justice.

"This time I will not accept a fraudulent outcome," he told foreign correspondents and diplomats, adding the situation could trigger "people power"-style street protests.

"If there is no recourse to justice, all avenues have been corrupted, how can you expect 267 million people to lie down and act as if we are goats and sheep?" asked Prabowo.

He narrowly lost the 2014 presidential election to Widodo, who got 53 per cent of the popular vote.
Senior government officials have warned disruptions or bids to delegitimise the poll result could amount to treason.

"If it is carried out with force, it is treason, and there are laws to deal with that," defence minister Ryamizard Ryacudu told reporters this week.

Also this week, a prominent opposition supporter was named a suspect in a treason case and others have been reported to the police on similar charges.

Prabowo's supporters have pledged to protest peacefully and regularly if the official result confirms Widodo's victory.

"Don't blame the people if they demand the truth," said one of them, retired military officer Rihananto Baroto, 67.

"Nothing can contain the 'people power'... and even the military will not be able to resist the people's anger."

At least 10 dead, thousands displaced after severe Indonesia floods
JAKARTA (AFP) - At least 10 people are dead and eight are missing after days of heavy rain triggered floods and landslides on the Indonesian island of Sumatra, the authorities said on Sunday (April 28).

Some 12,000 people have been evacuated while hundreds of buildings, bridges and roads have been damaged by the severe weather which affected nine districts or towns across Bengkulu province, officials said.

The waters have receded in some places but officials warned that the full extent of the damage was not yet known and some areas were still cut off.

"The impact of this disaster may increase," national disaster agency spokesman Sutopo Purwo Nugroho said, adding that several people were also injured in the flooding.

"Landslides and floods could happen again if rainfall is high," he said.

A secondary disaster in the form of skin diseases and acute respiratory infection due to poor hygiene and a lack of clean water was possible, he added.

Aerial images showed swollen rivers that had burst their banks and inundated settlements in some parts of the province.

Public kitchens and evacuation shelters have been set up to cater to some 13,000 people affected by the flooding, while search and rescue teams try to reach hard-hit areas with rubber boats.

Heavy rain pounded the greater Jakarta area, causing the Ciliwung river to burst its banks, and prompting flash flooding in at least 17 communities.
Related Story
Torrential rain triggers flooding, evacuations in Jakarta
"The distribution of aid has been hampered because road access has been cut off by the floods and landslides," Dr Sutopo said, adding that excavators were being used to clear debris from roads.

Landslides and floods are common in Indonesia, especially during the monsoon season between October and April, when rains lash the vast South-east Asian archipelago.

Flooding in parts of the Indonesian capital Jakarta this week killed at least two people and forced more than 2,000 to evacuate their homes.

Residents of Bogor, a satellite city of Jakarta, had to contend with some 14 pythons that were set loose from a private property due to the high waters.

Six of the snakes - which were as long as 4m - have been found, but the remaining eight remain on the loose, officials said.
Jakarta has most polluted air in Southeast Asia: Study
Smog blankets Jakarta’s skyscrapers. Air pollution in the city is the worst in Southeast Asia. (The Jakarta Post/Wendra Ajistyatama )
Jakarta ranks first as city with the worst air quality in Southeast Asia last year, a recent study has shown.  

The study by Greenpeace and AirVisual IQ published on March 5, monitored air quality in hundreds of cities across the globe. Jakarta was ranked first, followed by Hanoi, for the worst air quality, the head of Greenpeace Indonesia, Leonard Simanjuntak, said.


Across the globe, Leonard added, Jakarta was ranked 161st for cities with the worst air quality. New Delhi was in first place.

 “Four- and two-wheeled vehicles exceed Jakarta's capacity. There is almost no control over them. It’s easier for people to use private vehicles in Jakarta,” he said as quoted by kompas.com on Thursday.

Another factor, according to Greenpeace, was coal-fired steam power plants (PLTU) located around Jakarta. The PLTUs contributed 33 to 36 percent to air pollution in Jakarta.

“There are PLTUs around Jakarta that are situated within a 100-meter radius of each other. It also contributes seriously to the level of air pollution in Jakarta," Leonard said.

He explained that the daily air quality average in Jakarta, according to the PM 2.5 indicator, last year was 45.3 micrograms pollutant particles per cubic meter.

"The daily average air quality in Jakarta is 4.5 times worse than the limit set by the World Health Organization [WHO]. That number also increased compared to 2017, when the average daily air quality in Jakarta was 29.7," Leonard said.

The WHO has set an average air quality guideline of 25 micrograms per cubic meter daily.
Strong earthquake strikes Indonesia's Sulawesi, triggering tsunami alert
image: data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==

Central Sulawesi quake
Residents prepare to evacuate to higher grounds in the aftermath of an earthquake in Central Sulawesi. (Photo: Twitter/@bluevn22)
12 Apr 2019 08:38PM (Updated: 12 Apr 2019 09:50PM) Share this content
514 shares

 
 
 
 
Bookmark

JAKARTA: A strong magnitude 6.8 earthquake rocked eastern Indonesia on Friday (Apr 12), the United States Geological Survey said, triggering a tsunami warning and sending panicked residents running from their homes.   

The quake struck at about 7.40pm at a relatively shallow depth of 10 kilometres off the east coast of Sulawesi island, said Indonesia's geophysics agency. This is on the other side of the island where a 7.5-magnitude quake-tsunami around the city of Palu killed more than 4,300 people last year.

image: data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==

Map earthquake Sulawesi Apr 12, 2019
An earthquake struck central Sulawesi, Indonesia. (Image: Twitter / Last Earthquakes)

The agency issued a tsunami warning for coastal communities in Morowali district.

The warning was lifted about 40 minutes later, with the geophysics agency estimating that the wave was under half a metre.

It was not immediately clear how much damage was caused by the quake or if there were any casualties, but the USGS warned that considerable damage was possible in poorly built or badly designed structures.

The quake was felt strongly in Palu, despite it being hundreds of kilometres away.

It was also felt in Luwu regency, Morowali and Banggai, said Indonesia's disaster agency spokesperson Sutopo Purwo Nugroho. 

"I ran straight outside after the earthquake - everything was swaying," Palu resident Mahfuzah told AFP.

The quake was "strong and long lasting", said Gina Saerang, a resident of Manado, the capital of North Sulawesi province, several hundred kilometers from the epicenter.

In Luwuk city in Banggai district, Central Sulawesi, resident Hapsah Abdul Madjid said people fled to higher ground and the electricity was cut, adding that residents panicked as fears soared over an imminent tsunami.

"Friends, I am now in Luwuk Banggai, Central Sulawesi. The earthquake is very strong here. People are running around," said Twitter user Jay. "Heard that there's potential for tsumani. Please pray for our safety."

"The office's walls were damaged," said another Twitter user Laela, whose brother was affected by the quake. "They are now planning to evacuate to higher grounds. Stay safe brother."

There were two aftershocks of magnitude 5 and magnitude 5.2 within 30 minutes of the first quake. 

Thousands in Palu are still living in makeshift shelters, six months after the late September disaster with at least 170,000 residents of the city and surrounding districts displaced. Entire neighbourhoods are still in ruins, despite life returning to normal in other areas of the tsunami-struck city.

The force of the quake saw entire neighbourhoods levelled by liquefaction - a process where the ground starts behaving like a liquid and swallows up the earth like quicksand.

READ: Thousands of kids still homeless 6 months after quake and tsunami hit Palu
READ: At Sulawesi quake’s epicentre, survivors struggle to survive with limited aid
Apart from the damage to tens of thousands of buildings, the disaster destroyed fishing boats, shops and irrigation systems, robbing residents of their income.

Indonesia has said the damage bill in Palu topped US$900 million. The World Bank has offered the country up to US$1 billion in loans to get the city back on its feet.

Indonesia is one of the most disaster-prone nations on Earth due to its position straddling the so-called Pacific Ring of Fire, where tectonic plates collide.

Last year was a particularly tough one, however, with more than 2,500 disasters ranging from a series of deadly earthquakes to killer landslides and volcanic eruptions.

The sprawling archipelago is dotted with more than 100 volcanoes, including one in the middle of the Sunda Strait between Java and Sumatra islands that erupted in late 2018 and unleashed a tsunami that killed more than 400 people.

