Madrid Is Basically Banning Airbnb From Its Historic Center

Madrid is preparing to pass legislation that would effectively ban 95 percent of Airbnb and homeshare listings from the city.

New regulations, released Wednesday by José Manuel Calvo, secretary for sustainable urban planning, place strict rules on home rentals, specifically in Madrid’s historic center.

The plan aims to “preserve residential use of buildings, putting a stop to permanent use (by tourists) and replace it with temporary, thus preventing housing from becoming accommodation exclusively for tourists,” according to The Local Spain.

City officials hope to prohibit landlords turning entire buildings into rentals, unless they have a hotel license.

Apartments in Madrid will not be allowed to be rented to tourists for more than 90 days per year. And those that are rented out to tourists will have to have a separate entrance from permanent residents. In the historic central zone, this will ban all but a few ground floor apartments (about 6 percent) from being rented to tourists. This zone includes the neighborhoods of Malasaña, Chueca, Sol, La Latina, and Lavapiés.

While the new plan awaits government approval, Madrid has suspended issuing tourist licenses for one year.

"Home sharing on Airbnb is helping local families across Madrid afford their homes and rising living costs, while boosting the local economy," reps for Airbnb said in a statement. "It is part of the solution to local housing concerns in the city, and is helping put tourism euros in the pockets of local families — not just wealthy hotel groups. We look forward to continuing our positive conversations with the City of Madrid on clear and fair rules that differentiate between professionals and regular families occasionally sharing their home."

This has been a major week for Spanish cities fighting homeshares. Valencia is introducing new rules that would prohibit Airbnbs from taking the city’s best views. And Palma, the capital of Mallorca, banned all unlicensed homeshare listings, effective this July.




Taxi drivers in Madrid call off Uber battle but hope to win the war

After 16 days of travel chaos in Madrid, taxi drivers in the Spanish capital called off their strike against ride-hailing apps on Tuesday despite not having their demands met by the government.

Cab drivers were seeking stricter regulation of Uber and similar services, which offer rides at cheaper taxi prices and can be ordered on the internet rather than in the street.

Madrid's refusal to accept the drivers' demands came after Uber and Cabify said they were suspending their services in Barcelona last week after the regional government ruled that ride-hailing services could only pick up passengers after 15-minutes from when the car was booked.

Last week, the biggest anti-Uber protest took place in Madrid — footage of which you can see in the video player, above — when hundreds of taxi drivers blocked the Paseo de la Castellana during rush hour. It took anti-riot police several hours to clear the vehicles with tow-trucks.

Defiant but defeated for the moment, union representatives in Madrid said the strike had shown the unity of the drivers, which would help them continue the fight for their demands.

“It is a long war, in which you can lose battles, but in the end, I’m sure we can win,” Julio Sanz, head of the Taxi Federation union, told reporters.

Spain's government already bowed to taxi drivers demands in September by giving ride-hailing apps four years to comply with a regulation that grants them one new license for every 30 taxi permits.




Spain cancels arms sale to Saudi Arabia over Yemen war concerns

Madrid to pay back the $10m (£7.8m) it has already received as part of the deal

Spain’s defence ministry has cancelled sales of laser-guided bombs to Saudi Arabia because of concerns over the Yemen war. 

Madrid signed a contract with Riyadh for 400 bombs in 2015. But it will now back out of the deal and return the $10m (£7.8m) they have already received.

Confirming the news, a Spanish government spokesperson declined to give any further details. There was no immediate response from Saudi authorities.

Last month the defence ministry said it had never sold arms that could be used against a civilian population, while condemning the killing of non-combatants in Yemen. 

It added that it would review any possible sales that had not yet been closed and could be involved in attacks on civilians.

In April, Spain signed a framework agreement to sell warships to Saudi Arabia in a deal estimated to be worth around €1.8bn (£1.6bn).

Amnesty International and other human rights groups have denounced western arms sales to Saudi Arabia and its allies in a war which has claimed the lives of more than 10,000 people and left 8.4 million on the brink of famine, according to the United Nations. 

The Independent has previously revealed that the number of British-made bombs and missiles sold to Saudi Arabia since the start of its campaign in Yemen had risen by almost 500 per cent.

Earlier this year, judges granted the Campaign Against the Arms Trade (Caat) permission to appeal a ruling by the High Court that allowed the UK to continue granting export licences so Saudi Arabia, despite allegations British weapons had been used to kill civilians in Yemen.

Lawyers representing Caat argued that the decision to grant the licences was against British arms export policy, which states that the government must deny applications “if there is a clear risk that the items might be used in the commission of a serious violation of international humanitarian law”.

Agencies contributed to this report 




Madrid wants to plant gardens on bus roofs to boost environmental credentials

Each installation would cost around €2,500 (£2,100) and would require an irrigation system to avoid any leakages

Madrid has released plans to plant gardens on the rooftops of buses to boost its green credentials. 

The proposals, which look to tackle CO2 emissions, also want portable gardens on the top of bus stops in the capital. 

Each installation costs around €2,500 (£2,100) and requires an irrigation system to avoid any leakages.

The project was chosen from 800 entries put forward to improve the city and will start with a pilot on two bus routes.

The selected routes go through the busiest zones in the city and were used by approximately 17 million people last year, according to the project organisers. 

“Each garden will be formed of metallic mesh and sustainable materials that can withstand movement and not leak water,” José Antonio Antona, the manager of the project, said, as reported in the Local.

“The idea is for them to soak up noise, heat and pollution,” he added.

Madrid is also one of four major cities that has pledged to ban diesel vehicles by 2025.

Much of the new environmental policy is a response to poor air quality and traffic pollution in the city. Earlier this month restrictions were placed on traffic on Gran Via in the run-up to Christmas.




The World's Oldest Restaurant Has an Oven That's Been Burning Since 1725 (Video)

They've never turned the oven off at Madrid's Botin Restaurant. 

The restaurant business is notoriously difficult: Tight margins, ever-shifting trends and the difficulty of gaining repeat customers with so many options to choose from means that, for many restauranteurs, simply surviving to the end of your lease can be considered an accomplishment. Meanwhile, Botin Restaurant in Madrid, Spain, has probably been through a few leases: At 293 years old, it’s recognized by Guinness World Records as the oldest continuously operating restaurant in the world.

The YouTube channel Great Big Story recently dropped by Botin Restaurant to see if they could uncover any of its secrets. Deputy manager Luis Javier Sanchez, who has worked for at Botin for 41 years, explained that the restaurant has been open since 1725 (in case you hate doing math).

However, even more impressive is the oven: “It is our jewel. Our crown jewel,” Sanchez says. “The oven has been burning continuously for 293 years. I’ll repeat that: 293 years. We never put it out. It needs to keep hot at night and be ready to roast in the morning. That’s the reason why we must never put it out. There is a special aroma in there; it’s truly incredible.”

Equally incredible is how dedicated the restaurant says it is to maintaining the cuisine is serves. Though Sanchez describes the wine cellar as “breathing history,” in some ways, the food is intended to taste like history, with each chef learning from his predecessor and then passing the recipes down to the next generation. “Our recipes are very old, from when the grandfathers started the restaurant,” he continues. “And we’ve stayed true to those recipes ever since.”

Still, Botin Restaurant isn’t completely stuck in the past. It has a website and all the necessary social media accounts. And of course, it’s also on TripAdvisor where people can leave reviews like, “Eh, I’ve heard this place peaked back in 1831.”




Madrid enacts temporary car ban to help fight rising pollution levels

The restrictions, which ban cars with a registration plate ending in an even number one day and an odd number the next, are set to continue until pollution levels are sufficiently cut

Madrid has ordered half of privately owned cars off the city's roads in a bid to tackle worsening air pollution levels. 

It is the first time the city’s authorities have activated stage three of its anti-pollution protocol, amid dangerously high nitrogen levels in the capital.

Vehicles with a registration plate ending in an even number were banned from driving within the limits of the ring road motorway around the city on Thursday, and odd-numbered registration plates are reportedly set to be banned on Friday.

The city council said in a statement: “Vehicles with even-number registration plates will be allowed to drive around on even-number days and cars with odd-number registration plates on odd-number days”.

The restrictions, which apply between 6:30am and 9pm, are set to continue until pollution levels are sufficiently cut, with motorists who ignore the ban facing a fine of €90 (around £77).

There are a number of exemptions, including ’zero emission’ vehicles, hybrids, motorised scooters, vehicles for disabled people and public transport.

Similar restrictions were established in Paris at the start of December, amid the French capital’s most prolonged winter pollution for at least 10 years.

Pollution levels have continued to rise in Madrid, despite a lowered speed limit of 70 km/h introduced earlier this week and a parking ban established in certain areas in November. 

In 2015, the Spanish capital exceeded the highest nitrogen dioxide levels permitted by the European Union for the sixth year in a row, and the problem has been made worse due to a prolonged period of hot and sunny weather.

On Sunday, levels of nitrogen dioxide in the city’s air reached 180 micrograms per cubic metre, and continued to rise over the following days, exceeding 200 micrograms per cubic metre by Thursday.

If the nitrogen dioxide levels reach 400 micrograms, Madrid authorities could activate phase four of its anti-pollution measures, implemented by former People's Party mayor Ana Botella in May 2015, which include reducing traffic on the M-30 ring road by 50 per cent and banning taxis from driving in the city centre.

In May 2015, a report from the European Environment Agency revealed that Spain exceeded safe pollution levels 150 times the previous summer, putting people at risk of breathing problems and lung disease. 

With 3.2 million inhabitants and 1.8 million cars, the capital has been cited as one of the most polluted in Europe.

