Police investigate historic rape allegation at house in Wythenshawe

Greater Manchester Police said investigation 'does not relate to any persons currently living at the address'

Police are investigating an historic rape offence at a house in Wythenshawe.

Officers arrived at the address on Benchill Road on Sunday night and look set to stay for some time.

Detectives have handed out leaflets in the surrounding area making clear the enquiries do not relate to anybody currently living at the address.

Police say they are supporting the family currently occupying the home while the investigation activity continues.

The leaflet says: "Dear Resident,

"I am writing to inform you that over the next few days you will see increased police activity in your area, specifically in and around Benchill Road.

"The activity is in relation to a criminal investigation being carried out by detectives from West Didsbury Police Station, who will be conducting enquiries at an address in relation to a historic criminal offence.

"I would like to reassure you that there is no connection to any person currently living at the address and we will be supporting the family whilst we carry out our enquiries.

"Local officers will be out on the street and I would encourage anybody who thinks they may have information to speak to them."

"You can also contact West Didsbury Police Station on 0161 856 4154.

"Information can be given anonymously by calling CrimeStoppers on 0800 555 111." 

In a statement given to the Manchester Evening News, police confirmed the historic offence is an allegation of rape.

A cordon has been established and Crime Scene Investigation vans arrived at the house on Monday.

A number of forensics officers were seen coming and going into the property throughout the day.

Local Pcs and PCSOs are also set to be stationed at the address for the duration of the investigation.

Superintendent David Pester of GMP’s City of Manchester Division added: "We’d like to thank residents in the area for their patience while we conduct our enquiries.

"To respect their privacy, we would request that people refrain from attempting to gain photographs of the scene while the investigation continues.

"It is likely that an increased police presence will be visible around the property over the coming days and we’d encourage people to approach officers with any concerns or intelligence they might have.

"We’re grateful for the support of partner agencies including Manchester City Council and Wythenshawe Community Housing Group while enquires are carried out."





Jet2 will now serve a Nando's snack on board

The airline has become the first in the UK to give its customers a 'Nando's fix' on board its flights

Jet2 passengers are in for a treat this summer if the latest addition to its in-flight menu is anything to go by.

The airline has become the first in the UK to give its customers a 'Nando's fix' on board its flights .

But don't get too excited just yet as its not the chicken meal you were probably hoping for.

Launching in time for summer, Jet2 will introduce 'Nando's PERi-PERi Flight Bites' - two sky high snacks infused with Southern African PERi–PERi spice.

One is the 'Nando's Box' which contains creamy houmous, smoky PERi–PERi drizzle and lightly salted pitta chips and the other is Nando's Half-popped Corn - a mild and delicious snacking option where fluffy popcorn meets crunchy corn.

Although you may not be able to get your go-to dish whilst on-board, once you touch down you may be entitled to a freebie as Nando's vouchers can also be found in selected boxes onboard, entitling one person to a free Nando's meal.

Steve Heapy, CEO of Jet2.com and Jet2holidays said: "The addition of these two fantastic snacking options give our customers even more great choice than ever, and mean that we are the first UK airline to offer Nando's products on our In-Flight menu.

"We have already made a number of exciting changes to our In-Flight menu this year, and we are sure this brand new menu will delight customers even more."

Earlier this year Jet2 also introduced its first ever in-flight vegan meal.





UK security service missed chances to thwart Manchester Arena attack: Lawmakers

Britain's MI5 security service missed potential opportunities to prevent a 2017 suicide bombing at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester that killed 22 people, senior lawmakers said in a report on Thursday.

LONDON: Britain's MI5 security service missed potential opportunities to prevent a 2017 suicide bombing at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester that killed 22 people, senior lawmakers said in a report on Thursday (Nov 22)

Britain suffered four attacks in 2017 that killed 36 people - the deadliest spate since the London July 2005 train bombings.

Parliament's Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC), a cross-party panel of lawmakers that scrutinises the work of government in these fields, said there had been a number of failures by those monitoring the bomber, 22-year-old Briton Salman Abedi who was born to Libyan parents.

Abedi had been known to MI5 since 2014 but was never referred to a counter-extremism programme and MI5 had not restricted his travel.

He also visited an extremist contact in prison but no follow-up action was taken by police or MI5.

"What we can say is that there were a number of failures in the handling of Salman Abedi's case," said Dominic Grieve, the committee chairman.

"While it is impossible to say whether these would have prevented the devastating attack on May 22, we have concluded that, as a result of the failings, potential opportunities to prevent it were missed," Grieve said.

HIGH THREAT LEVEL

Britain is on its second-highest threat level.

The report said it was striking that many of the issues it was raising on the 2017 attacks were similar to those in a report on previous attacks.

"We have previously made recommendations in all of these areas, yet the government failed to act on them. The lessons from last year’s tragic events must now result in real action," Grieve said.

Amongst the failures last year were the decision by MI5 not to monitor or restrict Abedi's travel, allowing him to return to the UK undetected in the days before he carried out the attack. MI5 have subsequently said it should have monitored his travel, said the report.

The report said there were deficiencies in MI5's monitoring of individuals who were not under active investigation.

"Abedi had in fact been flagged for review, but MI5's systems moved too slowly and the review had not happened prior to him launching his attack," Grieve said.

There was no immediate response to the report from the interior ministry.





Commentary: Lessons on regulating Airbnb from a UK city

Units being used for short term-rentals are plenty in Manchester, a city that is struggling to build affordable housing, causing concerns among local services, businesses and residents, says one observer.

SHEFFIELD: The short-term rental market has ballooned in recent years. Airbnb listings in ten UK cities increased by almost 200 per cent between 2015 and 2017, according to one UK residential landlords' association.

And while attention has mainly focused on the problems this is causing in big cities such as London, or tourist hotspots such as Barcelona and Berlin, communities in England’s regional cities are also feeling the effects.

The growth of short-term rentals is closely tied to the broader financialisation of housing – that is, changes in the housing and financial markets, which have turned housing into a commodity.

These changes have opened the door for new investors to buy and develop more units, which in turn increases the scarcity of housing, prompts landlords to raise rent, threatens community bonds and stretches neighbourhood services.

The short-term rental sector is made up of two different business models. Serviced apartments are typically run by a single business, which offer a hotel experience for visitors in many city centres.

Landlords can also rent out rooms or entire properties through sharing economy platforms such as Airbnb. By providing this service, Airbnb has given people a new means to earn money on their homes – sometimes without having to follow all the laws that apply to renting.

GROWING TRENDS

In 2016, the Association of Serviced Apartment Providers found that 86 per cent of serviced apartment units in Manchester were occupied throughout the year. Alongside other regional cities such as Liverpool and Bristol, Manchester is a key target for serviced apartment operators.

To find out exactly how short-term rentals are affecting regional cities such as Manchester, I undertook research to collect data on 22 serviced apartment schemes, containing almost 1,200 units across central Manchester and neighbouring Salford over 2017. 

The average starting price for a night in a serviced apartment was £99 (US$127), and owners made an average monthly income of £2,563 per unit. In contrast, the returns on long-term rentals for residents yielded around £850 per month.

Interesting findings were also discovered in a 2016 survey by sector analysts AirDNA, which showed a total of 310 units advertised on Airbnb within central Manchester, and more than 1,500 across the city region. 

They noted a 70 per cent annual growth in the sector from the previous year. The average price per night for an entire property is £143, with the highest being £1,251.

Across the city, my research identified over 350 properties, which had been taken out of the long-term rental market up to 2016, with many more expected over coming years. Indeed, in 2017, there were more than 4,000 units being used for short-term rentals, in a city struggling to build affordable housing, according to real estate company Colliers.

The 2016 data from AirDNA revealed 177 hosts operating Airbnb properties in central Manchester: 59 owned multiple properties and accounted for 62 per cent of all listed units. 

It is likely that many of these hosts are people who own multiple properties, or who set up small enterprises to use housing in central Manchester as a business.

And there are concerns that those properties taken out of the long-term rental market may not be operating with any licensing or planning permissions. 





