Australia and the U.S. Are Old Allies. China’s Rise Changes the Equation.

SYDNEY, Australia — To understand why the Trump administration has struggled to build a global coalition of allies in its trade war with China, it helps to understand what is happening in the rolling hills and valleys of Australia’s southeast and southwest coasts.

Vineyards that once made many crisp white wines and fruity red ones popular with American buyers are now also producing more austere reds favored by a segment of a rapidly expanding market of Chinese drinkers. Since 2008, Australia’s wine exports to the United States have fallen 37 percent; exports to China have risen 959 percent.

Around the globe, longtime allies are planning for a world in which the United States is no longer the economic center. For all the frustrations of doing business with China, including opaque government action and allegations of intellectual property theft, the sheer logic of economic geography is proving more significant than historical alliances.

The tension is evident in many countries with deep economic ties to the United States, including South Korea, Japan and Germany. But perhaps nowhere is the tug more vivid than in Australia, long one of America’s closest allies, which now finds itself pulled in the opposite direction by China, its largest export market

In national elections scheduled for May 18, both major parties have called for a balanced foreign policy, aimed at maintaining the country’s longstanding national security alliance with the United States — while also looking to nurture the relationship with China.

Neither party’s leaders have adopted the bellicose anti-China language of President Trump, nor the use of tariffs to try to force the Chinese to yield to Australian demands. (The Trump administration recently raised tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese imports to 25 percent from 10 percent and threatened to expand the tariffs to encompass all Chinese imports.)

Australia’s cultural affinity with the United States remains strong. Australian and American troops fought together in World War II, and more recently in Afghanistan and Iraq. The countries’ intelligence agencies share some of their deepest secrets. But in terms of cold hard (Australian) dollars, the nation’s business and political leaders now speak of the world’s two largest economies as equally important partners.

“Our interests are not identical to the U.S.,” Geoff Raby, a former Australian ambassador to China who advises companies doing business in the two countries, said in an interview. “That doesn’t mean we can’t have a close, warm relationship with the United States. But we cannot join the U.S. in a policy premised on China being a strategic competitor.”
Editors’ Picks
Emma Thompson Gets a Shock at 60
How Much Alcohol Can You Drink Safely?
‘S.N.L.,’ Hosted by Paul Rudd, Takes On Trump and the Abortion Bans




The Evolving Australia-Indonesia Relationship Amid Election Season

Although counting remains ongoing, Joko “Jokowi” Widodo looks likely to have retained the Indonesian presidency. The continuity of his presidency should be welcomed by Australia as a stable pole in the relationship. From Jakarta’s perspective, should the Labor Party beat the Liberal Party in Australia’s forthcoming election (to be held May 18), Jokowi will be beginning his second term having to get to know his fourth Australian prime minister, Bill Shorten. With personal relationships being an important factor in building mutual trust between the two neighbors, Jakarta will hope that Shorten will at least be able to serve a full term (something no Australian prime minister has done since 2007).

While lacking the economic weight of China and the security alliance with the United States, due to its size and location Indonesia will always be one of Australia’s most important relationships. And yet this reality always seems to be something that is discussed but never approached with great enthusiasm. You can make a reasonable case that no two neighbors are more culturally distinct than Australia and Indonesia. This presents a significant challenge to relations, especially in understanding norms and customs, and has done much to keep the two countries estranged from each other.

Despite the two countries’ proximity, the trading relationship between them remains underdeveloped. For Australia, their trade with Indonesia is eclipsed by countries with much smaller populations like New Zealand and Singapore. Yet Indonesia will become the world’s seventh largest economy by next year, and has the potential to become the fifth largest economy by 2030, presenting ample opportunity for Australia should it wish to engage wish to truly engage with its large northern neighbor.
Enjoying this article? Click here to subscribe for full access. Just $5 a month.

This is also an important strategic imperative. Although Jakarta remains focused on its internal complexity and seems uninterested in, or disinclined to use, its increasing strength, this is bound to change as it becomes accustomed to its growing weight. Canberra will need to find ways to work with its neighbor’s power. For this, it will be important for Australia to embrace a greater cultural understanding of Indonesia in order for it to be comfortable with the country’s growth.  

Although Jokowi has been seen as an inward looking president, not particularly concerned with international relations, and seemingly seeing nothing special about the relationship with Australia, he and Malcolm Turnbull had developed a warm relationship during the latter’s prime ministership. This allowed the two leaders to establish enough mutual trust to complete the bulk of the work on the free trade agreement between the two countries.

Yet this was jeopardized when Turnbull was removed from the prime ministership in an internal party coup last August. During the subsequent by-election for Turnbull’s parliamentary seat, the new Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, disturbed relations between the two countries when he declared that Australia would shift its embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. The declaration (subsequently withdrawn) demonstrated a lack of understanding of how the issue of Palestinian enfranchisement was of great importance to Indonesia, both at the state level and throughout civil society. The signing of the free trade agreement between the two countries was subsequently put on hold, though eventually signed in March this year.

Although the FTA has now been signed, it is yet to be ratified. A potential change of government in Australia in May could see Labor try to renegotiate a number of the FTA’s provisions. The new composition of the Indonesian parliament may also be a factor in its ratification, with most Indonesian political parties having a broadly nationalist disposition and a suspicion toward foreign influence.

Should the free trade agreement be successfully ratified by the legislatures in both countries it may facilitate greater economic cooperation and begin to bridge the cultural divide between them. Yet finding areas of compatibility will require a much greater effort than Australia is used to. The “China model” of trade relations — where Australia digs up resources and exports them to rapidly developing countries — is less compatible with Indonesia, which is a market competitor in many of the minerals Australia has in abundance. This indicates that a far more sophisticated approach to trade, one where a more intimate understanding of Indonesia will be required by the Australian public.

However, this is something Australia continues to struggle with. Australia has tended to want Asian partners to “come to us” in order to bridge the great cultural distinctions within its region. Acceptance of Australia’s geography, and the economic realities of the coming decades, remains slow in the country. The study of Bahasa Indonesia has declined in recent years in Australian schools and universities, demonstrating a lack of commitment by Canberra to fully grasp the importance of its large northern neighbor.

When in opposition the Labor Party tends to make overtures about the importance of learning  Asian languages, although no significant and durable programs are created when they do form government. The Liberal Party seems to pays little attention to the subject, seeing no issue as long as elites throughout Asia can speak English. If Labor does take office in May, a true test of its commitment to the Australia-Indonesia relationship will be the resources it dedicates to the learning of Indonesian in Australian schools. This would also be a prominent signal to Jokowi that Australia seeks a more robust engagement with him during his next five years, and coax him toward a consideration of the importance of the bilateral relationship to the neighborhood’s dynamics.



Australia’s Politics May Be Changing With Its Climate


HARDEN, Australia — It’s been a year of extremes for this country. The hottest summer ever. Torrential rains in the north. A crippling drought in its southeastern farm belt.

Now, with national elections scheduled for May 18, a vital question looms: To what degree will climate change sway the way Australians vote? The answer could provide important lessons for other democracies in the age of climate change.

Australia is acutely vulnerable to climate change, just as it is also a culprit. The continent has warmed faster than the global average; its cherished Great Barrier Reef has been devastated by marine heat waves; and heat and drought this year took a bite out of the country’s economy, according to a top official of the country’s central bank. At the same time, central to its prosperity is the extraction of the dirtiest fossil fuel: Australia is the world’s biggest exporter of coal for power generation.  

Against that backdrop, the governing conservative coalition, led by the Liberal Party, is under pressure in key districts as independents assail longstanding members of Parliament like Tony Abbott, a former Liberal leader and prime minister, over their climate positions. 

To understand what it all means, I recently drove through southeastern Australia, the country’s most populated area, to speak to voters, both urban and rural, about climate change.

In rural districts, voters who traditionally send conservative lawmakers to Parliament are talking openly about the effects of climate change — in some instances, even coming out to protest. And, in poll after poll, climate change has climbed the ladder of concerns among the electorate. 

More than 60 percent of voters identified climate change as the top “critical threat” facing Australia over the next 10 years, while nearly the same share said the government should take steps to address global warming even if that involves “significant costs,” according to a poll by the Lowy Institute, an independent research group.

Another poll by Ipsos, a market research firm, found that half of all Australians gave the government “poor” marks on managing climate change. 

My road trip began in Melbourne, continued on to Sydney and then took me west to the land of Angus cattle and Merino sheep in the vast, parched countryside of New South Wales. On these undulating hills and bare fields, generations of farmers have raised livestock, sown wheat and canola, and elected conservative lawmakers to Parliament. Climate change, for the most part, they used to dismiss as city talk, or just “rubbish,” recalled Peter Holding, 64, a third-generation farmer who lives near a hamlet called Harden.

That’s changing.

These days, the soil is so dry that a sparse occasional rain shower barely dampens the dirt. Feed prices have skyrocketed. Dams have dried up. Farmers have thinned their stocks.

And in a country town called Wagga Wagga, where talk of climate change would have been shocking not long ago, more than 200 people showed up to a climate change protest rally in March that Mr. Holding, who is active in a group called Farmers for Climate Action, helped to organize. “Don’t Vote for Fossil Fools,” read one handmade sign. “Denial is not a policy,” read another. 

“You would never run a rally like that 10 years ago, but it’s become blatantly obvious things are changing,” Mr. Holding said. “I don’t think we’re going to get back to normal.”

It all worries Guy Milson. A 68-year-old rancher, he has, he said, “come around” on climate change. The evidence has become impossible to ignore. The drought has scorched his land. He has had to sharply reduce his herds of cattle and sheep. This blistering summer, even the old, hardy eucalyptus trees roasted in the heat.

“We’ve never put so much carbon into the atmosphere,” Mr. Milson said. “It can’t be normal.”

But all his life, he has been loyal to the right-of-center Liberal Party. He sees the incumbent energy minister, Angus Taylor, a friend, as a possible future prime minister. And he worries that fear over climate change will punish his party at the polls, especially in swing seats around the country. He is also wary of ditching coal, just now. It is too important to Australia’s economy. He says bigger polluters like China should act first.

The average Australian’s carbon footprint is slightly lower than that of an American. The country’s total emissions have risen to their highest level and it is not on track to meet its Paris climate agreement pledge, according to independent monitors. And a scathing report published recently by a research and advocacy group called the Climate Council said the “lack of climate change action is the defining leadership failure of the past decade.”

Farther west, I found Edward and Stephanie Gebhardt sitting on their front porch, scanning the skies for rain. The Gebhardts bought a farm just before the latest drought began to set in. Now nearly all their reservoirs were dry. In the muddy slope of one, a thirsty lamb got stuck and died. The fields on which they would normally sow wheat this time of year remained ashen. “It’s almost as if the seasons have shifted,” said Ms. Gebhardt, 31.

Neither of them doubted climate change. Neither had much faith anymore in either of the two conservative parties, the Liberals and their coalition partners, the National Party, that their families had long voted for.

“Honestly I struggle to vote now,” said Mr. Gebhardt, also 31. “No one has come out with anything to help us.”

Voting is compulsory in Australia, so Ms. Gebhardt signaled her dissatisfaction in the latest state polls by voting for a gun rights party called Shooters, Fishers and Farmers. It was a “donkey vote,” she said, the term used here for a ballot protest. 

The energy minister, Mr. Taylor, defended what he called the governing coalition’s “balanced approach” to gradually reduce emissions in the coming years, while promoting hydropower and investments in solar and wind energy. “A majority of people want to see action,” he said. “They want it to happen at a sensible pace and without substantial costs to them.”

The Labor Party, the official opposition in Parliament, proposes a faster reduction in emissions and a target of 50 percent renewable energy by 2030. But it has steered clear of the idea of a carbon tax, which another Labor government implemented 10 years ago; that Labor government was then ousted by a Liberal Party leader who campaigned on a promise to “ax the tax.”

That Liberal Party politician — Mr. Abbott, who once suggested that Australia pull out of the Paris climate accord but has since changed his position — is now facing one of the biggest political challenges of his career.

On the way back from ranch country, I stopped by his district, in the suburbs north of Sydney. Neither Mr. Abbott nor his aides responded to requests for an interview. 

But one of his main challengers, a lawyer named Zali Steggall who is Australia’s only Olympic medalist in Alpine skiing, eagerly explained why she had decided to run for office in an effort to unseat him. “Tony Abbott has been a massive hand brake on our policies on climate,” she said.

Ms. Steggall, an independent who is running for the first time, was speaking on a warm Wednesday evening at the North Curl Curl Surf Club. She sat before a roomful of voters, with a picture-perfect view of the South Pacific behind her. Surfers went in and out of the waves. The audience, mostly middle-aged white voters, asked about the minimum wage (she said she was not sure raising it would be realistic), immigration (she agreed with the governing coalition that fewer immigrants should be allowed in) and how to bring down the price of electricity (“We need an orderly retirement of coal,” she said).

Ms. Steggall said she favored lifting a luxury tax on electric vehicles and promised to promote renewable energy, but only gradually. She touched on an anxiety that I heard repeatedly from Australian voters: “It’s not about taking dramatic action that will change your livelihood or lifestyle,” she assured her audience.

Ms. Steggall is not alone in taking on Liberal Party stalwarts, either. She is among several independent candidates. Nearly all are campaigning on climate change.

“The fact that all these people are running is a huge message from the electorate,” said Ebony Bennett, deputy director of The Australia Institute, a research group. “We’ve never seen anything like it before.”


Attributing the hack on Australia’s parliament will give clarity to the China relationship

Whoever becomes prime minister after the election will face a sobering moment in Australia’s China policy.

It will show starkly why the policy that has had bipartisan support since Australia’s diplomatic opening to China in the 1970s is now not fit for purpose. What Scott Morrison or Bill Shorten does in that moment will shape his time in leadership on one of the most significant issues for any Australian government—its policy towards the Chinese state.

Put at its simplest, the policy of the previous 50 years has focused on the mutual benefits to Australia and China of our economic engagement, while keeping the large differences in our strategic interests and political systems in the background.

So, what’s this moment of truth? Well, it’s that little matter of who exactly the ‘sophisticated state actor’ was that hacked into parliament’s information system, and into the networks of the Liberal Party, the Labor Party and the National Party.

Morrison revealed the hacking in a statement to parliament on 18 February, saying, ‘Public confidence in the integrity of our democratic processes is an essential element of Australian sovereignty and governance.’

National security agencies are both cautious and forensic in their work on the attribution of cyber intrusions. This is about technical and operational integrity, as well as about ensuring they get the advice to Australia’s political leaders right. That’s why we’ve seen the careful use of the phrase ‘sophisticated state actor’.

But that careful forensic work will have continued since February. There will be a point very soon—if it hasn’t already been reached—when the agencies, which have the technical capacity, will advise the government who is behind these breathtaking cyber intrusions into the heart of our political system and democratic decision-making machinery, with a very high degree of certainty.

The ‘sophisticated state actor’ is almost certain to be an organ or organs of the Chinese state—most probably the Ministry of State Security, which President Xi Jinping has given primary responsibility for cyber hacking for state purposes.

Hacking at this level requires two things: capability and intent. Iran, Russia, North Korea and China, as well as the US and its Five Eyes partners (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the UK), all possess sophisticated government cyber tools, so they all have the capability. Australians can tell themselves that we’re a key country on the international stage, but it’s fortunate that we don’t rank that highly as an intelligence target in Tehran, Pyongyang or Moscow, and that our allies and partners already know what we think.

Only one state on the list has that combination of capability and intent to be the one that’s hacked its way to the heart of our democracy.

That state—Xi’s China—also has form as the acknowledged global leader in large-scale hacking and cyber intrusion, including a hack on the Australian parliament’s computer network in 2011.

As recently as December 2018, Foreign Minister Marise Payne and Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton stated:

    [T]he Australian Government joins other international partners in expressing serious concern about a global campaign of cyber-enabled commercial intellectual property theft by a group known as APT10, acting on behalf of the Chinese Ministry of State Security.

    When it is in our interests to do so, Australia publicly attributes cyber incidents, especially those with the potential to undermine global economic growth, national security and international stability.

What’s the motive for hacking Australian political parties?

The Chinese Communist Party under Xi would like to change Australian policy on several issues of great importance to Beijing. This is driven not so much by Beijing’s objectives for the Australia–China relationship as by its larger global agenda and the strengthening of CCP rule over China’s 1.4 billion people.

Australian decisions that work against the spread of Chinese coercive power and criticise Xi’s domestic and international steps matter to him because of their demonstrative effect. He wants to stop this clear-eyed approach being taken up by other governments in response to the now obviously assertive, coercive and militaristic Chinese state.

So, Beijing would like to change Australian policy on rejecting the militarisation of the South China Sea, on not signing up to the Belt and Road Initiative, on excluding high-risk vendors like Huawei and ZTE from our 5G network, and on limiting foreign interference through the laws passed by a thumping parliamentary majority last year. Limiting criticism of the growth of China’s surveillance state and of Xi’s brutal repression of China’s Turkic Muslim and Uyghur populations are other objectives.

The policies adopted by Australia are dangerous to Beijing because they make a lot of sense—and they might just prove contagious. Other governments may choose to adopt them as a way of recalibrating their own relationships with the new China that Xi embodies.

Which is why it makes sense to point to China’s Ministry of State Security as the ‘sophisticated state actor’ that hacked into Australia’s parliament and major political parties.

Think about the value of the information in the parliamentary IT system and the parties’ networks.

The systems of the Liberal, Labor and National parties would contain a treasure trove of data about party gossip, disputes, policy arguments and working relationships—and dirt on political opponents and on the parties’ own members.

If another state wanted to know which political figures were vulnerable to pressure, which ones might be likely to support them and which oppose them, who the rising stars are and what they might need to succeed (or fail)—and who has what dirt on any of the above—then the party databases, email systems and networks are the places to go.

On top of this, the major parties have hugely detailed data on millions of voters, segmented by electorate and by myriad personal factors like employment, income, views and preferences. Those details are shortcuts for a state seeking to influence public opinion in ways conducive to its interests, and would also be of great help in pressuring and isolating individuals and groups that might question Beijing’s ‘correct line’.

Forget the Russian interference in the 2016 US presidential election; this deep penetration of our major political parties and of parliament’s IT system shows a drive to gain access to and influence over our politics far beyond any single election campaign. It’s a bid to own the crown jewels of political data and intelligence that can be used for short- and long-term influence and interference.

If finding the culprit in a cyber intrusion was ever important, this is the time and this is the case. If it turns out to be China’s Ministry of State Security, it will be hard for any political leader to say that the national security community is overstating the threat that Xi’s CCP poses to Australia’s political integrity and national security.

It will be impossible to say that policy on China can return to the happy days of the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s and focus only on the upside of economic growth. Such corrosive and deep penetration into our political system cannot be explained away or minimised.

From that moment, any advocates of blinkered economic engagement with the Chinese state will need to recognise what a number of political leaders and policymakers already have: that we can’t simply seek a happy, trouble-free relationship when Xi’s China keeps acting in ways that are corrosive to our political system and against our sovereignty and our national interests.

Pursuing advantageous trade relations as we sell Beijing the world-class resources and services China needs is still a good idea. But being honest about the differences between our two states—and acting to protect our national interests when we need to—is the best foundation for our future relationship.

The Australian public is ready for this level of honesty from its government, and Beijing won’t be surprised when it comes.

I look forward to the explosive memo that attributes responsibility for the attack on our democracy landing on the prime minister’s desk after the election. It will be one of those rare leadership moments that distils the character of our prime minister and demonstrates it to the public whose votes have given them such heavy responsibilities.

