Aeroflot plane crash: 41 killed on Russian jet
Forty-one people died after a Russian plane made an emergency landing and burst into flames just after takeoff from Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.

Dramatic video shows passengers using emergency exit slides to escape the burning Aeroflot aircraft.

Survivors suggest the plane was struck by lightning, but Russia's national carrier said only that it returned to the airport for technical reasons.

Two children are among the dead. The jet had 73 passengers and five crew.

Initial reports suggested the plane had landed on fire, but sources quoted by Russian news agency Interfax said the jet caught fire after a very bumpy landing.

The aircraft landed with full fuel tanks because the crew lost contact with air traffic controllers and decided it was too dangerous to dump fuel over Moscow, Interfax added.

"There are 37 survivors - 33 passengers and four members of the crew," said Yelena Markovskaya, an official involved in the investigation of the crash.

A flight attendant was also reportedly killed in the incident. Five people are in hospital. One witness said it was a "miracle" anyone escaped.
Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev has ordered a special committee to investigate the disaster.

What happened to the plane?
The aircraft, a Sukhoi Superjet-100, left the airport at 18:02 local time (15:02 GMT), bound for Murmansk.

Its crew sent a distress signal when "malfunctions" occurred in bad weather shortly after take-off.

After making an emergency landing at the airport, the plane's engines caught fire on the runway, Aeroflot said, adding that the crew "did everything to save the passengers".
One passenger who survived the crash, Petr Egorov, was quoted by the Komsomolskaya Pravda daily newspaper as saying that the flight "had just taken off and the aircraft was hit by lightning", adding: "The landing was rough - I almost passed out from fear."
Aeroflot published a list of survivors (in Russian) who have been identified so far.

Murmansk's Acting Governor Andrey Chibis has reportedly said that the families of those killed in the fire will each receive one million rubles ($15,300; £11,630), while the victims being treated in hospital will be given 500,000 rubles ($7,650; £5,815).
How did the survivors escape?
Mikhail Savchenko claims he was on the plane when it exploded into a fireball on the tarmac but "managed to jump out".

He shared a video of passengers running away from the burning plane, posting: "'Guys I am all right, I am alive and in one piece."
Passengers on board a separate plane awaiting takeoff at the airport posted footage on social media showing fire crews attending the plane on the tarmac.
One of the surviving passengers, Dmitry Khlebushkin, said that he was very grateful to the flight attendants. "Only thanks to the flight attendants, I survived," he told reporters.

Kristian Kostov, a former Bulgarian Eurovision contestant, has posted on social media about witnessing the incident.

He said people at the airport were left "shaking" after seeing the aircraft engulfed by fire.

Another eyewitness, Patrick Horlacher, told the BBC it was "shocking to see" the plane being ravaged by flames just minutes before he was due to board another flight.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has reportedly been briefed and expressed condolences to the families of victims.

The region of Murmansk has announced a three-day mourning period.

Can lightning bring down a plane?
With millions of commercial flights taking place every year, lightning strikes in the air are relatively common.

Traditional planes, built using aluminium, are usually able to withstand such strikes as the shell or "skin" of the aircraft acts as a cage, distributing the electricity without causing damage and allowing them to continue their journey safely.

Some newer aircraft are constructed using lighter materials that have lower electrical conductivity, such as carbon fibre, which need to be protected - often using wire mesh or foil.
In addition, the electronics and connections to an aircraft's fuel tanks are heavily shielded to protect them from external electrical bursts.

Lightning strikes can cause technical malfunctions, causing planes to divert or make emergency landings for precautionary reasons. But crashes following such incidents are rare.

A strike is still likely to be noticed by people on board, though. Passengers may hear loud bangs or experience the cabin lighting up with a bright flash.
On Eve of Russia Trip, Pompeo Squelches Criticism of Moscow
State Department quietly takes down a statement blaming Russia for coup attempt in Montenegro.
early three years after foiling an audacious coup attempt, authorities in Montenegro on Thursday convicted 14 people—including two alleged Russian military intelligence agents in absentia—of participating in a plot to overthrow the government.

News of their jail sentences was widely lauded by Western governments, including a statement released Thursday from the U.S. State Department extolling the move as a “clear victory for the rule of law, laying bare Russia’s brazen attempt to undermine” Montenegro’s sovereignty.

But that U.S. statement went out by mistake, Foreign Policy has learned. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo opposed it, according to current and former U.S. officials familiar with internal deliberations, who suggested it was because the secretary wanted to soften combative tones with Moscow ahead of his forthcoming visit to Russia.

“Since the thwarted Russian-backed coup attempt on Montenegro’s parliamentary election day in October 2016, Montenegro has taken important steps toward integrating with the Transatlantic family, most notably joining NATO in June 2017,” the statement said.

The statement was accidentally released on Thursday afternoon. Pompeo’s office directed the department to quash it, but the bureaucratic machinations were already set in motion. Shortly after it was released, it was quickly recalled and quietly taken down from the State Department website.

The minor blunder offers a glimpse into the precarious diplomatic line Pompeo must walk as he prepares to visit Russia next week to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov. After the release last month of special counsel Robert Mueller’s report on Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. elections to tip the scales in now-President Donald Trump’s favor, both Trump and Pompeo have signaled they’re ready to kickstart a new phase in U.S.-Russia relations.

“We hope we can find places where we can have overlap in our interests,” Pompeo told ABC’s This Week in an interview on May 5. “I think it makes perfect sense that any place we can find where we have overlapping interests, we work along with the Russians.”

The State Department did not respond to request for comment.

Trump has worked to adopt a chummy personal rapport with Putin, despite the Russia-related scandals swirling over his White House. At the same time, his administration and Congress have adopted hard-line stances against Russia: tightening sanctions, boosting U.S. defense spending in Europe, shipping lethal weapons to Ukraine as it battles Russian-backed separatists in the east of its country, and supporting Montenegro’s NATO membership.

Pompeo has dismissed criticisms that the administration is not being tough enough on Russia amid showdowns with the former Cold War rival in Ukraine, Syria, and Venezuela. He sharply condemned Russia’s involvement in propping up Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s regime after the United States and more than 50 countries recognized opposition figure Juan Guaidó as the country’s legitimate president.

Trump had an hourlong call with Putin on May 3. The two broached the subject of the Mueller investigation and discussed Venezuela, Trump said afterward. “He is not looking at all to get involved in Venezuela, other than he’d like to see something positive happen for Venezuela,” he said of Putin, striking a conciliatory tone toward the Russian leader. Pompeo’s push not to rebuke Russia over its alleged role in the Montenegro coup plot falls in line with that tone.
Pompeo will have to strike a careful balance between the two faces of U.S.-Russia policy ahead of his visit on May 12 to 14, which includes stops in Moscow and Sochi. The State Department announced the trip in a statement released on Friday, saying Pompeo would meet Putin and Lavrov in Sochi “to discuss the full range of bilateral and multilateral challenges.” The agenda includes arms control, North Korea, Ukraine, Syria, and Iran, according to senior State Department officials who briefed reporters by phone on Friday. Pompeo and Lavrov met earlier this month along the sidelines of an Arctic Council meeting in Finland.

Montenegro, the tiny Southeastern European nation that gained independence from Serbia in 2006, defied heavy-handed Russian pressure in order to join NATO in 2017. The move struck a symbolic and political blow to Moscow’s wider efforts to wield influence over the Balkans.

A Montenegrin court on Thursday convicted 14 people, including two pro-Russian politicians and the two suspected Russian military intelligence operatives, on charges of attempted terrorism and creating criminal organizations in their aims to overthrow the government in 2016 and unravel the country’s bid to join NATO. The court said they plotted to take over the Montenegrin parliamentary building and kidnap Milo Djukanovic, Montenegro’s then-prime minister and current president, ahead of parliamentary elections in October 2016.
The two suspected Russian agents, Eduard Shishmakov and Vladimir Popov, were convicted in absentia. Their whereabouts are unknown.

Where Does the Russia-North Korea Relationship Stand?
Russian President Putin reiterated the importance of denuclearization during last week’s summit, but did not provide visible sanctions relief for North Korean leader Kim. 
Russian President Vladimir Putin and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un discussed denuclearization during their first-ever summit in Russia last week. Scott A. Snyder, CFR’s senior fellow for Korea studies, offers his analysis.  

What is the big takeaway from Kim’s summit with Putin?
Kim desperately needed to replace the narrative of weakness after failing to make a widely expected deal with the United States at the Hanoi summit with a narrative of strength, both domestically and internationally. Last week’s summit with Putin allowed Kim to show stature internationally and discuss alternatives to the U.S.-proposed big deal on denuclearization. But he failed to win Russian support for weakening the international sanctions regime. For Putin, the summit provided an opportunity to emphasize Russia’s relevance in Korean peace and denuclearization negotiations, which have so far been dominated by the United States and South Korea.

During the summit, Putin reiterated the importance of denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula, but he also backed North Korea’s advocacy of a phased process involving confidence-building measures with the United States. Putin provided no visible sanctions relief, despite bringing economic and energy ministers to discuss Russian and inter-Korean railway and energy projects.

This was Kim’s first summit with Putin. Why did it take so long?
The long wait reveals that the two sides have limited shared interests, and saw a summit as a relatively low priority, with few potential gains. Putin was disappointed that Kim did not accept invitations to Moscow in 2015 to commemorate the end of World War II and in 2017 for a meeting on regional economic development. 

For North Korea, Russia’s relative influence and importance remains low. China’s economic and political influence on North Korea vastly eclipses that of Russia, and North Korea sees its relationship with the United States as the primary obstacle to its development objectives.

More From Our Experts
Lori Esposito Murray
The Hanoi Summit: Comparing Trump to Reagan at Reykjavik Is Wrong
Scott A. Snyder
No-Deal Summit: Will Trump and Kim Break up or Make up?
Carla Anne Robbins
U.S.-Cuba Relations: Three Things to Know
Where does Russia stand on sanctions relief? What is its trade relationship with North Korea?
Russia has been an essential partner in UN Security Council (UNSC) deliberations to impose sanctions related to North Korean nuclear and missile tests. But Russia has not strongly enforced UNSC resolutions. Russian companies have re-exported North Korean coal and transshipped oil and petroleum to other countries in violation of UN sanctions. Russia continues to allow upward of ten thousand North Korean laborers to work in Russia despite international efforts to prevent Pyongyang from earning foreign currency from forced labor abroad.

In his post-summit press conference, Putin indicated that there should be “solutions available that would allow us to avoid confrontation” and praised North Korean laborers as “diligent, law abiding people.” Russia has also unsuccessfully advocated for what the United States regards as premature relaxation of UNSC sanctions on North Korea.


Russia-North Korea trade in 2018 totaled just $34 million, a 56 percent decrease from 2017, significantly less than the $2.43 billion between China and North Korea in 2018. Transactions with China account for almost 90 percent of North Korea’s recorded foreign trade. Russian interests in North Korea over the past decade have primarily been mercantile, including interest in exploring energy and transshipment of goods to South Korea via railways and pipelines through the North. But the infrastructure investments that Russia would have to make in North Korea have been impeded by financing constraints and a hostile business environment. Putin also identified the U.S.-South Korea alliance as an obstacle to the realization of Russian-Korean energy cooperation.

The Soviet Union supported North Korea during its early days, but their relationship became strained.  What factors continue to impact the relationship today?
The historical relationship makes Russia familiar to North Korea, with many Russian speakers among older North Korean elites and a shared communist history. But the breakup of the North Korea-Soviet Union relationship in 1990 was sudden and ugly. While Russia maintained a diplomatic presence in Pyongyang, the collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in the withdrawal of substantial economic subsidies to Pyongyang and a decades-long effort to renegotiate North Korea’s outstanding debt to Russia. The fall of the Soviet Union also provided a historical burden in that Kim hopes to avoid replicating the Soviet experience.

Russia Has Won the Information War in Turkey
The Kremlin doesn’t even need fake news to push its agenda on Turkish social media. Because domestic disinformation is rampant, Moscow has managed to infect both sides of the debate.

In recent weeks, Turkey’s long-standing bid to acquire Russian S-400 missile defense systems has received renewed media attention. As Presidents Vladimir Putin and Recep Tayyip Erdogan were meeting in Moscow to recommit to the deal, the Turkish defense minister was in Washington trying to allay NATO fears that the purchase would be a threat to the alliance.

Alongside the high-level diplomatic tug of war between Washington and Moscow over ties with Ankara, another battle in Turkey’s media was infecting the debate over defense relationships with false information. For example, a pro-government newspaper insisted recently that the S-400 would destroy the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), and another outlet asserted that the anti-air systems were ideal for counterinsurgency operations.

The United States and other NATO countries insist that the S-400 jeopardizes NATO’s Integrated Air and Missile Defense architecture. Furthermore, the U.S. Congress and the Pentagon are unanimous in their threat that if Turkey buys the S-400, it will be taken out of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program. Recently, most pro-government outlets have begun advocating Turkey’s preference for Russia’s next-generation Su-57 fighters, instead of the F-35s. For example, Turkey’s main news agency published a comparison between the F-35 (which is currently being delivered) and Russia’s Su-57 (currently in flight-testing phase) to make the case that Washington’s threats over F-35 deliveries were futile. Another columnist argued that it was impossible for the United States to make progress on F-35 production without Turkey’s help.

The spread of factually inaccurate opinions such as these is a daily occurrence within Turkey’s heavily corrupted information ecosystem. Turkey is already one of the countries most exposed to fake news, has one of the highest ratios of bot infections in the world, and is also among the countries with lowest resistance to fake digital newsTurkey is already one of the countries most exposed to fake news, has one of the highest ratios of bot infections in the world, and is also among the countries with lowest resistance to fake digital news, as measured by the Media Literacy Index. Heavy government controls make the media environment more susceptible to information manipulation by removing alternative voices from the online marketplace of ideas. This also makes Turkey one of the most vulnerable countries to organized computational propaganda during international political crises.
In such an environment, Russia does not need to launch a coordinated disinformation campaign similar to what it has done in the West. Domestically produced fake and accurate news that is sympathetic to Kremlin views is already rampant. Moscow is thus well positioned to deploy its information warfare to steer policy decisions in its preferred direction. In a hypothetical crisis scenario, where information and time constraints prevent an accurate assessment of the problem at hand, Moscow could push its agenda more directly and quickly.

In a recent study, I mapped the extent of Russian digital information operations in Turkey by combining more than 183 million tweets, with occasional Facebook checks, from 2015 to 2019. The results show that Russia employs a less direct strategy in Turkey compared with other documented cases in the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Rather than outright disinformation, pro-Russian accounts engage in what could best be termed as “forced perspective” information operations in Turkey.Rather than outright disinformation, pro-Russian accounts engage in what could best be termed as “forced perspective” information operations in Turkey.
Domestic pro-Russian accounts and bots in Turkey rarely deploy false information these days and instead use accurate information but distort its meaning and remove its context. In addition, these accounts use timing to their advantage to push a factually accurate narrative in particularly crisis-prone periods to distort the public narrative in favor of Russia.

This not only increases public support for pro-Russian policies (or the acquisition of their weapons systems) but also decreases support for pro-NATO policies. Russia also plays both sides to maximize its influence. It affects mainstream pro-government information networks through its direct influence on the government. At the same time, it hedges by ensuring that Russia’s main Turkish-language outlets, Sputnik Turkiye and RSFM radio, are overwhelmingly pro-opposition. This enables Russia to control the narrative on both the pro-government and the pro-opposition networks.

This wasn’t always the case. Before Russia’s entry into the Syrian civil war, Turkish digital media was largely ambivalent and defensive toward Moscow. The main turning point was Turkey’s shooting down of a Russian Su-24 fighter jet in Syria in November 2015, after which Russian digital information operations spiked in Turkey. Aiming to distract observers from the debate over whether the jet had veered into Turkish airspace, Russian social media accounts instead highlighted the claim that Turkey was selling oil produced from Islamic State-controlled territoriesAiming to distract observers from the debate over whether the jet had veered into Turkish airspace, Russian social media accounts instead highlighted the claim that Turkey was selling oil produced from Islamic State-controlled territories in Syria.
This narrative became one of the most successful Russian information operations, as it succeeded in not only distracting both Turkey and NATO allies from the fact that a Russian jet had strayed into Turkish airspace but also drove a wedge between Ankara and other NATO capitals over Turkey’s policy toward the Islamic State. Within weeks of the incident, the bulk of international media attention was focused less on whether the Russian jet had strayed into Turkish airspace, or whether Turkey was justified in firing on it, and more on Islamic State-produced oil smuggled into Turkey. This information campaign demonstrated that Moscow could easily single out and isolate Turkey. It was also the starting point of Turkey’s rebalancing away from NATO and toward Russia.

Russia’s information operations in Turkey seemed to disappear almost entirely after the first Putin-Erdogan meeting in St. Petersburg in August 2016—the first meeting after the Su-24 incident. It is difficult to infer the exact details of what was discussed in that meeting from the information released to the media, but my research shows that all Russian allegations related to Islamic State oil completely disappear from Turkish digital media. After the August meeting, Turkish pro-government media networks began assuming a markedly pro-Russian stance, and Turkey started gravitating toward Moscow as part of its rebalancing act on issues related to Syria, energy, and arms sales.


In other cases—such as the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey, Andrei Karlov; the July 2016 coup attempt; S-400 negotiations between Turkey and Russia; and Turkey’s historic June 2018 general election—both forced perspective information and disinformation traceable to Russia had a negligible impact on the information ecosystem. Instead, both of these pro-Russian content types are being disseminated through Turkey’s own pro-government and opposition social media networks.

Karlov’s killing could have set off a diplomatic crisis. Shot by an off-duty Turkish police officer at a public event in Ankara, the assassination exposed the divisions and interest groups within Turkey’s embattled post-coup security community. From Russia’s point of view, emphasizing Turkey’s inability to protect an ambassador or exploiting its internal divisions would have been quite an easy information operation to pull off. Instead, all pro-Russian accounts in Turkish-language digital domain went silent and only shared statements made by the Turkish leadership. This was Moscow’s way of signaling its intention to allow Ankara to frame the incident and establish its own narrative. It was also a major signal of improving relations between the two sides.

The first few hours of the incident were marked by an overwhelming influx of statements calling the incident “fake” or “purposefully staged to make Turkey look weak.” However, once the Turkish investigation of the incident was finalized, all government officials stepped in and offered their condolences online, and all traces of domestically produced disinformation suddenly disappeared.

Disinformation has become the primary medium of political communication in TurkeyDisinformation has become the primary medium of political communication in Turkey, permeating almost all political debates and discussions. Although the pro-government ecosystem has been far more heavily involved in disinformation attempts, this is a result of the government’s control over a wider array of state communication resources. All sides in Turkey’s political system resort to deliberate disinformation commensurate with their capabilities and resources.
Russia doesn’t have to corrupt the information ecosystem in Turkey to manipulate it because its ecosystem has already been plagued by the systematic use of fake news and disinformation and is therefore ripe for external manipulation.

The Kremlin isn’t interested in which side prevails, as long as it can influence the narratives on both sides and disseminate pro-Russian content.The Kremlin isn’t interested in which side prevails, as long as it can influence the narratives on both sides and disseminate pro-Russian content. When pro-Russian information supports the government’s position, the pro-government networks disseminate it. When the information contradicts the government’s position, the opposition network picks it up. As a result, pro-Russian information and sentiment flow unhindered across the entire spectrum of Turkish digital media.
As Russia successfully demonstrated after its jet was shot down, Turkey has little resistance to Moscow’s information operations. Yet, once Turkey began to rebalance in favor of Moscow, Russian strong-arm tactics largely disappeared, evidenced by the aftermath of the Karlov assassination. As a result of this shift, Turkey also became far more willing to buy the S-400 and became immune to Washington’s threats regarding the F-35 program.

Russia’s ongoing influence over both pro-government and pro-opposition digital media in Turkey will give Moscow the upper hand in any future crisis or emergency.


American Held in Moscow Says Arrest Is Retaliation for Russia Sanctions
Paul Whelan’s letters home only deepen the mystery surrounding his detention.
BY AMY MACKINNON | MAY 7, 2019, 8:47 AM
Excerpts of a letter by Paul Whelan, seen in Moscow on March 14, and a note transcribed by his lawyer.
Excerpts of a letter by Paul Whelan, seen in Moscow on March 14, and a note transcribed by his lawyer. FOREIGN POLICY ILLUSTRATION/VLADIMIR GERDO/TASS VIA GETTY IMAGES
Paul Whelan, the former U.S. Marine held in Moscow on suspicion of espionage, believes his arrest may be President Vladimir Putin’s way of retaliating against the United States for sanctions it imposed on Russia over its annexation of Crimea, according to letters sent to his family via his legal team in Moscow.

Whelan raised the issue in two letters home since he was detained more than four months ago, but the references are cryptic and fail to make clear why Russia would choose him or the company he worked for as targets for its retaliation. The Whelan family lawyer, Ryan Fayhee, shared the letters with Foreign Policy.

The notes deepen the mystery around Whelan’s ongoing detention. Some former U.S. officials said the comments further discredit Russia’s claim that it had legitimate cause to arrest Whelan. Others cautioned against taking the remarks at face value, pointing out that Russian security services could have been controlling and possibly dictating what Whelan said.

Russian authorities arrested Whelan in late December and continue to hold him at Moscow’s notorious Lefortovo Prison but have offered no evidence to support allegations of spying.

“This is 100% work related. Ask BW for support. Sanction retaliation,” Whelan said in a message received by his family on March 26. BW appears to be shorthand for BorgWarner, the Michigan-based auto parts manufacturer where Whelan worked as a global security director.

The letter was dictated by Whelan at a meeting in prison with his legal team and transcribed by one of his defense lawyers who speaks English. The lawyer, Olga Karlova, then photographed the note and sent it via email to Whelan’s twin brother, David, who lives in Canada.

In the letter, Whelan directs his family to contact his employer, BorgWarner: “[C]ompany BW does business with here, recently had to reorganize due to sanctions. A person was excluded from that company, get name and give that to [U.S. Ambassador to Russia Jon] Huntsman.” He also advises his family to contact the company’s chief legal office and its director of trade compliance.

David Whelan told Foreign Policy in a phone interview that the family takes every piece of information that doesn’t come directly from Whelan with a grain of salt. But he added that notes previously transcribed by the translator had proved to be accurate.

“We’re not sure if he’s not allowed to say certain things or if he thinks he’s being clear,” he said.

To verify the remarks, David Whelan asked a diplomat from the U.S. Embassy in Moscow to question his brother during a consular visit about issues raised in the letter. Whelan’s responses appeared to reinforce the things he wrote.

In a reply dated April 7, Whelan’s sister, Elizabeth, asked where Whelan received his information and whether he thinks BorgWarner is involved specifically.


Whelan responded with a new letter, this time in his own handwriting, saying it “came from people here. Sanctioned friends with locals, who look for big fish and now know their mistake.” He reiterated that he doesn’t think BorgWarner was targeted specifically and that he believed Russian authorities may have been looking to go after a U.S. company more generally. A photograph of the letter was received by Whelan’s brother on April 10.

In the same note, Whelan, who had flown to Moscow late December to attend a friend’s wedding, said his Russian visa was paid for by his company. In a statement to Foreign Policy, a BorgWarner spokesperson said: “As a general policy, BorgWarner does not comment on the travel of its employees. We will reiterate that Paul was not traveling on company business.”

Whelan’s brother said the family has no direct contact with the company. “We don’t know how they are taking this information or what they are doing about it,” he said.

The Russian Foreign Ministry did not respond to a request for comment about the case or claims made in Whelan’s notes.

“I think someone who is in prison, who is being held by the Russians, can be forced to say anything,” said Daniel Fried, a retired career diplomat who helped craft the U.S. response to Russia’s intervention in Ukraine as State Department sanctions coordinator.

“It does look like this guy was picked up as trade bait, rather than legitimately,” he said.

Huntsman, the U.S. ambassador to Russia, visited Whelan in prison last Tuesday. In a statement posted on Twitter, a spokesperson for the embassy said the ambassador and Whelan had been prevented from talking about “anything that actually matters” and that Russian officials were still preventing Whelan from signing a power of attorney that would enable his family to take care of his affairs in the United States.

“Consular access without being able to speak openly is frankly a joke. We take seriously our responsibilities to U.S. citizens. Stop playing games!” the spokesperson tweeted.

At a hearing on Russia in the House Foreign Affairs Committee last Wednesday, Chairman Eliot Engel said, “Russia continues to hold Paul Whelan, an American citizen, under false charges of espionage. Russia is denying him his basic human rights and has been dragging its feet every step of the way.”

Richard Nephew, the former principal deputy coordinator for sanctions policy at the State Department, said that if the Russian authorities had sought to make a statement regarding sanctions, there were other Western companies in Russia with higher profiles that could have been targeted.

“If you’re picking targets for a hostage taking, dealing with sanctions, and you’re Vladimir Putin, no offense but you’re not picking this guy or this company,” he said.

When asked by Foreign Policy about the claims made in the letters, Daniel Hoffman, a former CIA station chief in Moscow, said Whelan would be under intense scrutiny by his jailers.

“I would say a high level of confidence that the FSB [Russia’s domestic security service] tracked every word that was written or spoken and medium to high level of confidence that they dictated this,” he said.

Similarly, Steven Hall, a former chief of Russia operations for the CIA, said Russian authorities could get Whelan to say or write anything they wanted. “They can, at any point, walk into his cell and say, look, you’re going to spend your next 30 years in a tuberculosis-ridden prison if you don’t do or say this,” he said.

But if the Russian security services did plant the idea that Whelan was detained in a bid to lash out against U.S. sanctions, it would discredit their claim that he was caught spying.

In 2014, President Barack Obama’s administration placed sanctions on a number of Russian defense companies as well as members of Putin’s inner circle over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its role in fomenting war in eastern Ukraine.

Whelan’s lawyer, Vladimir Zherebenkov, told reporters in January that Whelan has been handed a USB drive that he thought contained photographs from a previous trip to Russia. Instead, the drive held Russian state secrets, Zerebenkov said.

It was the only hint to have surfaced so far about the kind of case Russian authorities might be preparing against Whelan.

Hall said the alleged incident sounded like a setup by the FSB, the successor agency to the KGB. But the motive of Russian authorities remains unclear.

“The question is … what’s their end game? Why did they do it?” Hall said. “Was it [that] they just wanted to send a message to the United States that if relations continue to deteriorate, Americans citizens are going to be at risk in Moscow?”
