Driver Sought After S.I. Woman, 89, is Killed in Hit-and-Run

STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. - Police on Staten Island are searching for a hit-and-run driver who struck and killed an elderly woman over the weekend.

Anastasia Diaz, 89, had just gotten off an MTA bus just before 10:30 p.m. Saturday when she was hit in a crosswalk near Purdy and Bradley Avenues in Castleton Corners.

She was pronounced dead at the hospital.

People who live nearby say police are looking for surveillance video of the crash.

"They went door to door looking if anybody had cameras on their houses and stuff like that. But hopefully they find the person who did this," said one resident.

"Have a heart, stop. Just stop. Just leave somebody to die. It bothers me. She's 89 years old, she ain't bothering anybody. Just hit her and keep going," said another resident.

Investigators say the car involved was a dark four door sedan.

It was last seen driving north on Bradley Avenue.

Anyone with information on the case should contact the Crime Stoppers hotline at 1-800-577-8477, or text CRIMES and then enter TIP577, or visit www.nypdcrimestoppers.com.





SEE IT: Brooklyn man stomped, beaten by five robbers and slashed in head — a wound so deep it reached his skull

A Brooklyn man was slashed in the head, the cut so deep it reached his skull, when he was beaten and robbed by five brutes — who then treated themselves to a $200 feast at a nearby McDonald’s with his credit card, the victim told the Daily News.

Kenneth Wong, 38, was walking on Chestnut St. near Glenmore Ave. in East New York when he was jumped from behind by five men around 5 p.m. Friday, cops said.

Shocking surveillance video obtained by The News shows the group approaching an unsuspecting Wong from behind and slashing him in the head. The victim raises his hands to his wound before one of the thugs punches him in the face, causing him to fall to the ground. Another man runs up and stomps on Wong’s head before they rifle through his pockets and take off with his wallet, leaving him bloody and dazed on the sidewalk.

“I was on my way from work, I just was going back to my house and the next thing you know, these guys came right up beside me and decided to attack me and stole my wallet," Wong told the Daily News.

Wong, who works as a government employee, said his wallet contained about $20, several credit cards and his driver’s license.

Wong was taken to a nearby hospital where he received 35 stitches and 16 staples in his head. The men also broke his nose in the attack.

“It was traumatizing to say the least,” he said. "It was surreal that (the cut) was really deep. I guess I should say I’m lucky that I’m still alive but still I’m in pain.

“I was thinking if I will live to see my kids," added Wong, a father of two. “This hopefully is a freak occurrence. I’ve been in the neighborhood for over a year and it seems pretty safe overall”

According to Wong, the crooks took themselves out to dinner at McDonald’s, splurging nearly $200, and spent another $7 at a Dunkin’ Donuts using one of his credit cards. They also spent a few bucks at a deli and grocery store.

“The boys went for a binge at McDonald’s," Wong said. “It’s just funny how these boys are going about life. They filled up their stomachs, all right.”

Wong said he would have handed over his wallet even if the brutes had not harmed him, and urges anyone who sees the video and recognizes any of them to call police.

“I’d rather have these guys apprehended so they’re not in the neighborhood and everyone’s safer. It’s traumatizing watching (the footage), watching myself getting hit like that, but if it helps the greater community … I just care about other people’s safety.”

Cops asked the public’s help identifying the men and tracking them down. All five are believed to be in their late teens or early 20s. Anyone with information is asked to call Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.





Health Officials Warn of Possible Measles Exposure at New Jersey Restaurant

Anyone who visited Rosalita's Roadside Cantina between 11:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on April 19 may have been exposed, the health department said

Patrons who visited a restaurant in New Jersey last week may have been exposed to measles, the state’s health department says.

A Middlesex County resident who went into Rosalita’s Roadside Cantina on Highway 9 in Marlboro Township on Friday, April 19 had a “highly suspect case of measles,” the New Jersey Department of Health said on Monday.

Anyone who visited the restaurant between 11:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on April 19 may have been exposed, according to the department.

“The department is working in collaboration with the Middlesex County Office of Health Services to identify additional exposures that could have occurred,” it noted.

Anyone who may have been exposed should call their health care provide before they go to a medical office or to the emergency room, to avoid spreading the disease, the department said.

Measles is a highly contagious disease, and symptoms include rash, high fever, cough and red, watery eyes.





Taste Of The Upper West Side Returrns

NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) – Next weekend is the annual Taste of the Upper West Side.

The food-based fundraiser brings about 80 restaurants and it’s all for a good cause.

Greg Silverman, executive director of the West Side Campaign Against Hunger, and Nicole Paynter, deputy director of the Columbus Avenue Business Improvement District stopped by to discuss it.

The kickoff takes place on Friday from 7 p.m.-10 p.m. at Columbus Avenue between 76th and 77th Streets.

This year’s honoree is the West Side Campaign Against Hunger, a supermarket-style food pantry.

For more information about the Taste of the Upper West Side, click here. For more information about the West Side Campaign Against Hunger, click here.





Backpacks Banned At Citi Field

NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) – The next time you head to Citi Field, leave your backpack behind.

That’s because the Mets just announced a new bag policy to enhance ballpark safety.

No one will be allowed to bring backpacks anymore starting Monday, May 20th.

That’s when they take on the Nationals.

Purses and other small items are still allowed. The cutoff is 16 inches by 16 inches by 8 inches.





Trump says people are so angry about investigations into him they are 'fleeing' New York

'All part of the Witch Hunt Hoax,' president tweets after state launches hotel probe

Donald Trump has claimed without providing evidence that people are leaving New York “in record numbers” because they are upset at the state’s investigations into his family business. 

“New York State and its Governor, Andrew Cuomo, are now proud members of the group of PRESIDENTIAL HARASSERS,” Mr Trump tweeted on Tuesday evening. “No wonder people are fleeing the State in record numbers. The Witch Hunt continues!” 

The president’s criticism of Mr Cuomo came in an apparent response to a New York Times report that New York attorney general Letitia James’ decision to issue subpoenas to two banks for documents related to a number of Trump hotel projects. 

The request to Deutsche Bank and Investors Bank was prompted by congressional testimony last month of Mr Trump’s former personal lawyer Michael Cohen, who told lawmakers his ex-client fraudulently inflated his assets in financial statements. 

The civil probe adds to the growing number of legal dangers for the president, who is also under investigation for alleged campaign finance violations and possible links to Russia. 

Mr Trump later shared a tweet from the Republican National Committee, which claimed Ms James was “proven to have a vendetta” against the billionaire after she described him last year as an “illegitimate president”.

“All part of the Witch Hunt Hoax. Started by little Eric Schneiderman & Cuomo. So many leaving New York!” Mr Trump added. Mr Schneiderman is the former New York attorney general.

Although New York has seen small population decreases annually since 2016, according to the US Census Bureau, there is no evidence the fall is due to the state’s investigations into the president. 

The decrease is likely a result of a slower than average recovery from the 2008 financial crisis, which has seen private sector jobs grow at just one third the national rate, according to conservative think tank the Empire Center for Public Policy.




Long Island Town Cracks Down On Cigarette Butt Pollution, Installs Half-Dozen Receptacles For Recycling

PORT WASHINGTON, N.Y. (CBSNewYork) — A trillion cigarette butts are tossed out world-wide every year, but one Long Island community is doing something about the eyesore and pollution they leave behind.

Not all smokers are going to give up the habit, but the habit of tossing what’s left over just anywhere is getting easier to kick in Port Washington, where cigarette butt receptacles now line Main Street.

They were installed by a civic group that’s not only fed up with the trashed look, but also the trail of butts that flows directly into storm drains and Long Island Sound waters, CBS2’s Carolyn Gusoff reported Friday.

“One good rain storm and it’s all going into the bay. It’s very upsetting,” said Mindy Germian, the executive director of “Residents Forward.”

Cigarette butts will now be collected and recycled. Once a week, special needs workers, paid by Main Street businesses, will empty the receptacles.

“Anything can be something else when you’re done with it. Cigarettes even,” Germian said.

Terracycle, a New Jersey-based company, will then separate the ash, tobacco and rolling paper and turn all of it into industrial fertilizer. The cigarette filters will help create plastic shipping palettes and outdoor furniture. What’s more, 60,000 butts make a park bench and 165,000 a picnic table, Gusoff reported.

“I think that’s an amazing idea. That’s an opportunity to make other things, instead of polluting our streets,” former smoker Elena Merlos said.

“It’s really sort of like the ultimate win-win. It’s the government partnering with the civic group is and business to take litter off our streets, promote recycling and hopefully encourage people to quit smoking,” said Dina DeGiorgio of the Greater Port Washington Improvement District.

If it works Port Washington, it may be expanded. North Hempstead Supervisor Judy Bosworth said cleaning up something small can have a big impact.

“It’s one step at trying to deal with the litter problem we have,” Bosworth said.

And if you though the cigarette filter was biodegradable, think again. They are made of cellulose, a type of plastic that can take years to break down into particles that end up in our waterways.

Six receptacles cost the group $1,000. Other locations, like Los Angeles, Seattle and St. Louis recycle cigarette butts.

Keep America Beautiful estimates 1.5 billion pounds of cigarette waste pollute the environment every year. They are the most littered item in the world.
