Singapore passes controversial ‘fake news’ law which critics fear will stifle free speech

Singapore has passed a controversial bill that could equip the government with extensive powers to police online media and free speech.

The bill was first drafted last month and, as had been expected, it passed 72-9 in Singapore’s parliament, dominated by the ruling People’s Action Party (PAP), late on Wednesday.

As we reported last month, the bill caused concern through its potential to stifle free speech, as a key feature enables the government, and in fact any minister, to force “corrections” to be added to online content that is deemed to be “false.”

Beyond media, the flex also extends to social media. According to the law, those found to be “malicious actors” face a fine of up to SG$50,000 ($37,000) or five years in prison for their content. If posted using “an inauthentic online account or a bot,” the fine jumps to a maximum of SG$100,000 ($74,000) or a potential 10-year jail term. Platforms like Facebook and Twitter face fines of up to SG$1 million ($740,000) for their role in such situations.

Designed to cover “a false statement of fact… has been or is being communicated in Singapore” or cases where politicians believe that issuing a correction is “in the public interest,” the bill also claims reach overseas — or, rather, intended reach overseas. Politicians can trigger it in situations judged to be “in the interest of friendly relations of Singapore with other countries.”

It remains to be seen how much success the Singapore government will have with its efforts. Domestic media may well be under control — the World Press Freedom Index ranks Singapore 151 out of 183 countries and self-censorship is common — but influencing newsrooms based overseas and social networks will likely prove difficult.

Facebook, for example, last November resisted calls to remove content flagged as defamatory by the government. That clearly frustrated officials.

“This shows why we need legislation to protect us from deliberate online falsehoods,” the Ministry of Law wrote in an announcement at the time.



How a takedown would work — and how the government might access encrypted chats on apps like WhatsApp and Telegram, which are also part of its focus — also remains unclear at this point.

The law has been criticized by free speech groups.

“Singapore’s new ‘fake news’ law is a disaster for online expression by ordinary Singaporeans, and a hammer blow against the independence of many online news portals they rely on to get real news about their country beyond the ruling People’s Action Party political filter,” Human Rights Watch  deputy Asia director Phil Robertson wrote on Twitter.

“Singapore’s leaders have crafted a law that will have a chilling effect on internet freedom throughout Southeast Asia, and likely start a new set of information wars as they try to impose their narrow version of “truth” on the wider world,” he added.

Human Rights Watch — which came out with strong criticism of the bill last month — was criticized by the Singapore government last month, which hit back at “its long-standing practice of issuing biased and one-sided statements about Singapore.”

Meanwhile, on the more assistive end of the dissenting voices, the Asia Internet Coalition — a group that represents Facebook, Google, Twitter, LinkedIn,  Line and others — penned an editorial in Singapore’s Straits Times newspaper suggesting changes to the bill.

The opinion piece — which, irony alert, is restricted by a paywall — recommended specific processes, an imperial body to vet decisions, exemptions for opinion articles, satire and more, as well as a request for “clear and well-defined language and scope.”

Robertson is concerned that other counties in Southeast Asia will take the ball Singapore has punted and run with it, thereby creating other restrictive online content policies. That’s already happened to some extent. In Vietnam, a draconian cybersecurity law went into operation on January 1 while Thailand passed a controversial law in February granting a wide scope of powers to authorities.
Waterspout near Tanjong Pagar Terminal startles residents




'tornado' seen in central singapore was a waterspout
A waterspout was spotted in central Singapore on May 11, 2019.



SINGAPORE: Some residents were startled by what they thought was a tornado near Tanjong Pagar Terminal on Saturday morning (May 11).

The "tornado" was in fact a waterspout, which is caused by intense thunderstorms, and is formed when columns of water are sucked to the base of the clouds.

Some social media users took videos and photos of the sight and posted them online.



Ms Grace Ng, a resident at the 76 Shenton condominium, said she spotted the waterspout at around 9am.

"The waterspout was very weak at first, and it kept disappearing and reappearing. But it came closer and then it grew larger. So we managed to take a good shot when the sky was very clear," she said.

The waterspout weakened when it reached the coast, and disappeared a few minutes after that, she added.

The whole thing lasted about 15 to 20 minutes, Ms Ng said, adding that it started to rain heavily after the waterspout disappeared.



Mr David Johnson and his wife Ms Teri Caldwell saw the waterspout from their home at Newton GEMS at around 8.45am. There were dark clouds but no strong winds or rain at the time, Mr Johnson said.

"It didn't last very long, maybe 10 minutes at most," he said.

Around 30 minutes after he saw the waterspout, it started raining, he added.


The National Environment Agency said previously that around three occurrences of waterspouts over Singapore waters are reported every year.

Waterspouts tend to have a short life cycle of up to tens of minutes and they usually dissipate rapidly upon reaching the coast, it said.

READ: 5 unusual natural world sightings in Singapore
It also noted waterspouts are generally associated with intense thunderstorms over the sea.

However, it is difficult to forecast the occurrence of waterspouts because not all thunderstorms lead to the formation of waterspouts.

In January last year, a waterspout off the east coast of Singapore caused strong winds and sent boats and rubbish bins flying at East Coast Park.



Singapore confirms imported case of monkeypox, patient quarantined
NATION

SINGAPORE (Bernama): Singapore Thursday (May 9) confirmed one imported case of monkeypox infection in the republic.

The Ministry of Health (MOH) said the patient is a 38-year-old Nigerian national who arrived in Singapore alone on April 28, 2019, and was tested positive for monkeypox on Wednesday (May 8).

He is currently warded in an isolation ward at the National Centre for Infectious Diseases (NCID), and his condition is stable, it said in its website.

MOH said the patient reported that prior to his arrival in Singapore, he had attended a wedding in Nigeria, where he may have consumed bush meat, which could be a source of transmission of the monkeypox virus.

The Ministry said the patient stayed at a hotel at 21 Lorong 8 Geylang from April 28 and had attended a workshop at 3 Church Street on April 29 and 30.

Based on MOH's investigation and contact tracing thus far, 23 persons have been identified as close contacts of the patient.

These include 18 participants and trainers who attended the same workshop, one staff at the workshop venue and four hotel staff who had close contact with the patient, it said.

MOH said close contacts of the patient have been assessed by NCID and offered vaccination, which can prevent the disease or reduce the severity of symptoms.

As a precautionary measure, they will be quarantined and monitored for 21 days from their date of exposure to the patient, said the Ministry. - Bernama

Recent deaths of 2 SAF servicemen due to unnatural causes 'not related to service': Ng Eng Hen

 

SINGAPORE: The deaths of two Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) servicemen last July and September on SAF premises were "due to unnatural causes not related to service", Defence Minister Ng Eng Hen said on Monday (Apr 1).

An off-duty regular serviceman was found hanging from a rope in his bunk at Nee Soon Camp last July. In September, a full-time national serviceman was found dead in his office at Sembawang Air Base.

"Police investigations to ascertain the causes and circumstances connected with these two deaths have been completed and submitted to the State Coroner," said Dr Ng. "The State Coroner found that there was no evidence of foul play and that the deaths were deliberate acts of suicide."

Dr Ng was responding to a parliamentary question by Non-Constituency Member of Parliament Dennis Tan, who asked about the causes of the two men's deaths, and whether they were related to issues experienced in the course of service.

Mr Tan also asked whether prior to their deaths, the two men's commanders or colleagues were aware of any problem or difficulty which had a bearing on their deaths.  

In his written reply, Dr Ng said: "The State Coroner did not identify any contributory factors related to their commanders or colleagues, (National Service) or work that could have led to the incident."

READ: ‘I am deeply sorry for the loss’: Ng Eng Hen on recent NS training deaths, vows accountability for every soldier
SAF deaths have been in the spotlight in recent months.

They include the death of actor Aloysius Pang earlier this year - the fourth SAF training fatality in 18 months. The actor died after sustaining serious injuries during an SAF training exercise in New Zealand.

Singapore’s NUS forced to overhaul handling of sexual harassment cases after backlash over Monica Baey’s peeping Tom incident
The National University of Singapore will set up a unit to support sexual assault victims, among other measures, after a student was filmed showering
Education Minister Ong Ye Kung has called NUS’ penalty for the offender as ‘manifestly inadequate’; other top universities are also rethinking their policies


National University of Singapore is changing its policies following accusations that it did not deal with a peeping Tom properly. Photo: InstagramNational University of Singapore is changing its policies following accusations that it did not deal with a peeping Tom properly. Photo: Instagram
National University of Singapore is changing its policies following accusations that it did not deal with a peeping Tom properly. Photo: Instagram
Strengthening its hostel security system and establishing a unit to support sexual assault victims are two “immediate” measures the National University of Singapore (NUS) would adopt to tackle sexual harassment on campus, in the face of a backlash following its handling of a peeping Tom incident.
The measures were announced during a two-hour town hall meeting on Thursday, at which the student body raised concerns about sexual misconduct to the university’s vice provost for student life Florence Ling and dean of students Peter Pang.
“The town hall was definitely necessary because clearly a lot of voices from the student body were demanding to be heard,” said Inez Yuen, a final-year sociology major who was one of hundreds at the meeting. “Sexual assault has been normalised by institutions for too long and the loud majority have finally had enough.”
Besides NUS, other top universities in Singapore are also rethinking policies related to sexual harassment on campus, in a bid to tackle such misconduct.
Singapore student Monica Baey wants firm action from NUS after man who filmed her in hostel shower goes ‘scot-free’
These efforts come amid closer scrutiny of university policies after NUS student Monica Baey last week took to social media to publicise an incident in which she was filmed while taking a shower in her hostel bathroom.
She asked for “real change” in how authorities tackle acts that violate women.
SUBSCRIBE TO THIS WEEK IN ASIA
Get updates direct to your inbox
your email
SUBMIT
By registering for these newsletters you agree to our T&C and Privacy Policy
The man who filmed Baey last November was given a 12-month conditional warning by the police. NUS suspended him for a semester, banned him from entering campus residences and made him send Baey a letter of apology.
Read more

Singapore student Monica Baey wants firm action from NUS after man who filmed her in hostel shower goes ‘scot-free’
Singapore student calls for tougher action after NUS peeping Tom incident



EVA Air flight attendant wants to sue for sexual harassment
Forced to undress a passenger, this flight attendant plans to sue



Chinese universities urged to do more to fight sexual harassment in wake of #MeToo cases
Chinese universities urged to do more to fight sexual harassment


Baey, who flew back to Singapore from Taiwan where she was on an exchange programme, kicked off the town hall by raising concerns over the university’s lack of victim support.
“There was little to no victim support provided to me by the school from the first point of contact,” she said, adding that she felt “extremely uncomfortable” when her statement was taken by a male officer.
Lack of proper communication from the university also made her feel that NUS wanted to “quickly close the case and move on”, Baey said.
Other students proposed a range of measures the university could implement to ensure the better handling of sexual misconduct cases.


19 people are talking about this
These ranged from improving facial recognition services so sexual offenders would not be allowed to enter campus residences, to meting out more transparent punishment to deter would-be offenders.
These suggestions would be taken into consideration, said dean of students Pang, and would be brought to the newly convened review committee tasked with reviewing the current disciplinary frameworks at NUS.
How Singapore’s obsession with university rankings only serves to hurt it
The university had earlier said it used a “second strike and you’re out” rule when handling sexual misconduct cases, which meant a student would only be expelled when found guilty of sexual misconduct for a second time.
According to records found on NUS’ student portal, 26 cases of sexual offences had been recorded over the past three years, and 18 involved sexual voyeurism.
Describing the penalty as “manifestly inadequate”, Education Minister Ong Ye Kung later said in a Facebook post that the current policy “cannot be the standard application”.

Share:
Pang during the town hall said changes would be made to NUS’ current policies, adding that the university would prioritise care and support for victims.
“We are starting the conversation with you, and this is just the beginning,” he said. “Our victim care is totally inadequate and we want to make things right.”
Moving forward, NUS will set up a centralised unit for victim care and strengthen safety measures at its hostels.
“I hope that this town hall can be the beginning of constructive and ongoing dialogue about what can be done to ensure better handling of sexual crime incidents and how the university can ensure its students feel protected,” said Baey, the student.
Singapore’s US$200k starter salaries: why education pays the price
Meanwhile, Singapore Management University (SMU) and Nanyang Technological University (NTU) are also rethinking their sexual harassment policies.
In a circular to its students seen by the South China Morning Post, SMU president Lily Kong said the university would review its existing disciplinary framework related to such cases.

NTU said it had strengthened its policies governing harassment, in addition to the introduction of a new anti-harassment online module for its freshmen come July.
The module, designed in consultation with student leaders, will include videos and information on what constitutes harassment as well as support resources for victims, and will later be rolled out to all NTU students.
The module is “designed to address new forms of harassment that have arisen due to advancements in technology”, said NTU’s deputy associate provost for student life Victor Yeo.
Forced to undress a passenger, this flight attendant plans to sue
“Raising students’ awareness on how to deal with such situations is essential to help curb harassment, and ensure a safe and conducive environment for everyone on campus.”
The NTU Student Union (NTUSU) felt the module was a good first step toward educating students on detecting signs of harassment as well as the appropriate channels to seek help.
“We believe that prevention is definitely better than cure,” said Tiffany Choo, NTUSU’s vice-president for corporate communications. “It is important for students to be more sensitive and aware of what constitutes harassment so that they can spot the signs and intervene among their peers in order to nip the issue at the bud.”

But the use of an online module to tackle a sensitive issue like sexual harassment has garnered mixed responses from students.
Some, such as final-year psychology major Allen Kwok, felt the module would be useful for raising awareness about such issues on campus.
“Victims would also know where to seek help and that there’s a community that they can fall back on,” he said.
Chinese universities urged to do more to fight sexual harassment
Others felt that even though the intentions behind such an online module were in the right place, it was idealistic to think the university could change perspectives with it.
“There are many things the university is doing that are trial and error,” said communications major Megan Koh.
“We would not know how successful an online module would be, but at least we know the school has started to pay more attention to sexual misconduct on campus, and hopefully improve their measures along the way.”